Mapping the Regulatory Learning Space for the EU AI Act
Dave Lewis1, Marta Lasek-Markey 1, Delaram Golpayegani 1, Harshvardhan J Pandit 2
1ADAPT Centre at Trinity College Dublin
2AI Accountability Lab at Trinity College Dublin
delewis@tcd.ie, mlasek@tcd.ie, golpayes@tcd.ie, me@harshp.com
Abstract
The EU AI Act represents the world’s first transnational AI
regulation with concrete enforcement measures. It builds on
existing EU mechanisms for regulating health and safety of
products but extends them to protect fundamental rights and
to address AI as a horizontal technology across multiple ap-
plication sectors. We argue that this will lead to multiple
uncertainties in the enforcement of the AI Act, which cou-
pled with the fast-changing nature of AI technology, will re-
quire a strong emphasis on comprehensive and rapid regula-
tory learning for the Act. We define a parametrised regula-
tory learning space based on the provisions of the Act and
describe a layered system of different learning arenas where
the population of oversight authorities, value chain partici-
pants, and affected stakeholders may interact to apply and
learn from technical, organisational and legal implementation
measures. We conclude by exploring how existing open data
policies and practices in the EU can be adapted to support
rapid and effective regulatory learning.
Introduction
Advances in research on fairness, accountability and trans-
parency of algorithms has normalised approaches towards
achieving ethical and trustworthy AI in response to soci-
etal concerns and risks posed. Where recent surveys regard-
ing trustworthy AI guidelines demonstrate a high degree of
consensus on common principles, including human rights
and agency, privacy, non-discrimination, safety and robust-
ness, transparency and accountability (Hagendorff 2020;
Jobin, Ienca, and Vayena 2019; Fjeld et al. 2020; Corr ˆea
et al. 2023), others argue that such a consensus on prin-
ciples is not reflected in their implementation and raises
new forms of avoidance. For instance, using techno-centric
approaches such as differential privacy and explainable AI
to avoid external inspection of AI design decisions and
association with ethical dilemmas and affected stakehold-
ers (Palladino 2023), or where such principles often rep-
resent “ethics washing” as a distraction from harmful be-
haviour (Schultz, Conti, and Seele 2024). In addition, uncer-
tainty about the implementation of ethical AI principles is
magnified by the rate at which new risks emerge due to the
accelerating pace of technological advancement and adop-
tion such as with Large Language Models (LLMs) and Gen-
erative AI (GenAI) (Grace et al. 2024).
The AI Act, first proposed in April 2021 and which en-
tered into force in August 2024, makes the EU the first juris-
diction to regulate AI technologies (AI Act). The Act takes
a risk-based approach modelled on the existing EU scheme,
known as the New Legislative Framework (NLF), for har-
monising product health and safety legislation across the EU
internal market (Mazzini and Scalzo 2023). Thus, the AI
Act benefits from established rules and practices for prod-
uct regulation laid out in the so-called “Blue Guide” (Eu-
ropean Commission, Directorate-General for Internal Mar-
ket, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs 2022). The leg-
islative process preceding the adoption of the Act eloquently
demonstrated the technology pacing problem. As powerful
classes of General Purpose AI (GPAI) threatened to evade
enforcement under the NLF, which is predicated on prod-
ucts with a specific purpose, new provisions had to be intro-
duced to handle the parallel advances in LLMs and GenAI.
Market actors, regulators and civil society now have a con-
crete timetable within which the many remaining uncertain-
ties in enforcing provisions of the Act present a substantial
challenge (kaizenner 2024; Keber, Schwartmann, and Zen-
ner 2024).
In this paper, we focus on two major areas of uncertainty
arising from novelties that the AI Act brings to the NLF.
Firstly, the AI Act expands the scope seen in current legis-
lation harmonised under the NLF from protection of health
and safety to include protection of fundamental rights. Sec-
ondly, the AI Act attempts to regulate AI as a horizon-
tal technology using enforcement mechanisms that are con-
ducted on a sectoral basis under the NLF, i.e. for specific
classes of products such as the Medical Device Regulation
(MDR) (Medical Devices Regulation).
We contend that given the regulatory uncertainties, pace
of technological progress, and the relative immaturity of AI
risk assessments and mitigations, the Act should in the first
instance serve as a framework for learning the appropri-
ate technical, organisational and regulatory measures which
then shape future regulatory and technical progress. We
therefore argue that a key benefit of the AI Act is the mo-
tivation to mobilise resources to resolve and build consen-
sus on these uncertainties in a way that addresses existing
and future AI risks in an efficient and legitimate manner. We
phrase this gain of knowledge as ‘learnings’.
To identify such learnings, we analyse the primary un-
arXiv:2503.05787v2  [cs.CY]  28 May 2025

certainties arising from the AI Act and define ‘learning are-
nas’ that are useful to structure and maximise the shared ef-
ficiency of learnings under the current complex structures
defined in the Act. We conclude with concrete recommen-
dations on how to improve the information flow between ac-
tors across learning arenas for accelerating shared learning
and to better respond to the pace of advances in AI.
Fundamental Rights and Legal Uncertainties
This paper argues that regulatory learning in the context of
the AI Act should begin, at the most general level, by ad-
equately identifying the role of fundamental rights and ad-
dressing issues related to the so-called direct effect of EU
law. This section will briefly outline the three sources of fun-
damental rights protection in the EU with particular focus on
issues with direct effect of the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights (CFR). It will then consider the application of the
Charter to the AI Act.
As EU integration progressed over the years, so did pro-
tection of fundamental rights. Consequently, within the EU
legal order, there is currently no single uniform source of
fundamental rights protection (Spaventa 2018). Instead, Ar-
ticle 6 TEU identifies three sources thereof, in chronologi-
cal order: 1) constitutional traditions shared by the Member
States; 2) the European Convention for the Protection of Hu-
man Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), which all
EU Member States are parties to but the European Union is
not; and 3) the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. The latter
has been gaining in importance since the Treaty of Lisbon’s
entry into force (2009), however, the scope of application
of the Charter is limited by its so-called horizontal provi-
sions, particularly Article 51. With Lenaerts, we note that the
CFR rights are “addressed to the institutions, bodies, offices
and agencies of the Union with due regard for the princi-
ple of subsidiarity and to the Member States only when they
are implementing Union law” (Lenaerts 2012). Therefore,
while the provisions of the Charter bind the EU itself and
the Member States, and this has been particularly evident in
policymaking, its impact in litigation has been limited due
to issues with direct effect of the Charter (Frantziou 2015,
2019). To be capable of direct effect, i.e. to create rights for
individuals, a provision of EU law must fulfil the follow-
ing three conditions laid down in the CJEU case 26/62 Van
Gend en Loos: it must be 1) clear, 2) precise and 3) uncon-
ditional and, therefore, not require any further implementing
measures.
In relation to CFR rights, the CJEU has to date only con-
sidered direct effect of four provisions. Consequently, Arti-
cle 21 CFR (right to non-discrimination), Article 31(2) CFR
(right to maximum working hours, to daily and weekly rest
periods and to annual leave) and Article 47 CFR (right to
an effective remedy and to a fair trail) have been deemed
as having direct effect (Prechal 2020). Conversely, Article
27 CFR (workers’ right to information and consultation) has
been denied direct effect in case C-176/12 AMS, where the
CJEU stated, in para 45, that “for this article to be fully ef-
fective, it must be given more specific expression in Euro-
pean Union or national law”. Therefore, it does require ad-
ditional implementing measures. Regarding the remainder
of the CFR, it is not clear which of the rights might be capa-
ble of direct effect and, thus, whether individuals might be
able to successfully rely on them.
Consequently, it is possible that in conflicts involving
fundamental rights in the context of the AI Act, the other
sources of protection, i.e. the European Convention on Hu-
man Rights which is binding on all the EU Member States,
and indeed the national constitutions of the Member States,
might also become relevant. As the EU and the Council of
Europe are in the process of negotiating EU’s accession to
the ECHR, a rebuttable presumption of equivalent protection
between the two systems, laid down in Article 52(3) of the
CFR, continues to apply (De Hert and Korenica 2012). In-
deed, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has de-
livered judgments where violations of the Convention were
found, e.g. in relation to unjustified processing of biometric
data (case Glukhin v Russia, Application no. 11519/20). In
this vein, the body of ECtHR case law constitutes yet an-
other important resource for regulatory learning pertaining
to fundamental rights.
While potentially all fundamental rights, including CFR
rights, might fall within the scope of application of the AI
Act, the Act explicitly refers to 17 fundamental rights in
Recital 48 of the Preamble, which had also been mentioned
in the Proposal for the AI Act (COM(2021) 206 final). This
implies that the European Commission expects these to be
of particular relevance in the context of AI, even though it
does not grant them any additional legal standing. It is un-
clear which of these fundamental rights beyond the right to
non-discrimination, the right to an effective remedy and to
a fair trial, as well the specific workers’ right to rest, might
have direct effect. The lack of direct effect might constitute
a barrier to effective enforcement of fundamental rights, par-
ticularly in horizontal disputes involving non-state actors,
i.e. private parties (Viljanen 2023; Fornasier 2015). In the
context of the AI Act, disputes involving fundamental rights
might potentially concern such types of deployers of high-
risk AI systems as private employers, insurance companies
or banks. Regarding fundamental rights that do not have di-
rect effect, e.g. the workers’ right to information and con-
sultation, it appears that such non-state actors would not be
bound by the Charter.
Many of the fundamental rights enshrined in the Char-
ter have further been concretised in secondary EU legis-
lation, some of which also has direct effect and would,
therefore, be binding on private parties. A prime exam-
ple is the right to the protection of personal data guaran-
teed by the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679
(GDPR), referenced multiple times across the AI Act, as
well as other legislation, such as the Law Enforcement Di-
rective 2016/680 or the ePrivacy Directive 2002/58. Other
examples of secondary legislation mentioned in the AI Act
which is connected to various CFR rights include Regula-
tion 2024/900 on the transparency and targeting of politi-
cal advertising; Framework Directive 2002/14 on employee
information and consultation or the Platform Workers Di-
rective 2024/2831. Additionally, the entire body of EU con-
sumer legislation gives effect to Article 38 of the Charter
(the right to consumer protection), including the Medical

Devices Regulation 2017/745, the Representative Actions
Directive 2020/1828 and the Unfair Commercial Practices
Directive 2005/29 to name a few examples mentioned in the
AI Act. Furthermore, there is other relevant EU secondary
legislation which, albeit not explicitly referenced in the AI
Act, provides additional layers of protection of various Char-
ter rights. A pertinent example is the EU non-discrimination
law consisting of the Framework Directive 2000/78, the
Racial Equality Directive 2000/43 and the Gender Recast
Directive 2006/54, where implications of AI and algorith-
mic management in employment are significant (Wachter,
Mittelstadt, and Russell 2021; Xenidis and Senden 2020).
Given the existing regulatory complexities and uncertainties
surrounding the status of fundamental rights and the Charter
in the context of the AI Act, the following list of questions
need to be prioritised towards ensuring predictable and con-
sistent enforcement of the Act:
1. Will all rights under the CFR be equally protected?
2. What role will Market Surveillance Authorities (MSAs)
in relation to identifying whether a high-risk AI system
has breached fundamental rights protections and enforce-
ment of corrective measures?
3. How will the enforcement powers of MSAs in enforcing
rights protections (executed in concert with national bod-
ies protecting fundamental rights as per Article 77 of the
AI Act) interplay with those of notified bodies, national
competent authorities?
4. What role and weight will be placed on the Fundamen-
tal Rights Impact Assessment (FRIA) conducted by AI
deployers and AI providers (Article 27) in enforcing fun-
damental rights protections?
Integrating Horizontal & V ertical
Requirements
The AI Act takes a risk-based approach with technical re-
quirements that fall primarily on AI providers that aim to
place an AI system on the market or into service in the
EU, as well as organisations that deploy such AI offerings,
termed AI deployers. The requirements specify the ex-ante
application of quality management (Article 17) and risk
management techniques (Article 9) and involve technical
measures for data governance and data protection (Article
10), technical documentation and record keeping (Articles
11 and 12), transparency (Article 13) and human oversight in
AI system operation (Article 14), and implementation of ac-
curacy, robustness and cybersecurity measures (Article 15).
While the requirements are similar in scope to many ex-
isting voluntary ethical AI guidelines, their integration into
the NLF poses important questions. In particular, it remains
to be seen whether satisfying these requirements will ade-
quately deliver the Act’s goals of a well-functioning internal
market balanced with high levels of protections for health,
safety and fundamental rights (Recital 1) (Evers 2024).
Adopting the well-established pattern of the NLF, the en-
forcement of technical requirements combines ex-ante certi-
fication of AI-based products classified as “high-risk” prior
to release and ex-post monitoring and surveillance of such
products once released and in use. The required certification
process depends on the class of the high-risk AI system in
question, of which the Act defines two sets. The first relates
to the use of AI in products that are already subject to har-
monised product legislation and listed in Annex I of the Act,
which would receive certification on conformance to the Act
via the certification mechanisms established therein. The
second relates to the use of AI in applications not subject
to existing product legislation but are deemed to represent
risks needing oversight and listed in Annex III of the Act,
for which self-certification of compliance will suffice, apart
from the area of remote biometric identification (Annex III,
point 1) for which a new certification mechanism will be es-
tablished. The ex-post enforcement of requirements on high-
risk AI systems involves planned post-market monitoring of
deployed systems by providers, adherence by deployers to
the instructions of use provided with the system and surveil-
lance of these by a network of Market Surveillance Authori-
ties (MSA). If an MSA has reason to believe that a high-risk
AI system placed on the market does not comply with the
Act’s requirements, it has the power to obtain detailed tech-
nical documentation and resources from the provider, up to
and including copies of the system code in order to make de-
termination of breaches of requirements. Depending on the
severity of any assessed breaches, an MSA may require cor-
rective measures to be made to the system or its instructions
for use or that the system is removed from the market. It may
also impose financial penalties on the provider or deployer.
The ability to unambiguously verify that a high-risk AI
system employs appropriate technical measures to mitigate
risks to health, safety and fundamental rights relies on in-
vestigation of technical documentation, testing and instruc-
tions, which therefore are central to the consistent and effec-
tive implementation of the Act, and where efficiency is vital
to minimising the regulatory burden of complying with the
Act (Golpayegani et al. 2024). However, the Act is limited
to essential high-level requirements for technical measures
and how they should be undertaken is stated in horizon-
tal terms independent of sectoral context. Instead, in com-
mon with some other regulations under the NLF, the Act
allows compliance with requirements to be demonstrated by
provider in terms of a presumption of conformity gained by
adherence to separate technical standards. These technical
standards can be either “Harmonised Standards” developed
by European Standards Organisations (ESOs) or if that is
not possible or insufficient then via “Common Specifica-
tion” to be developed by the European Commission (EC)
(Tartaro 2023). The EC has already issued a request for
harmonised standards in 10 areas to the ESOs, addressing
different aspects of the required technical measures (Euro-
pean Commission 2023). A Joint Technical Committee of
the ESO’s CEN and CENELEC (JTC21) has been chartered
in response to develop European Standards for AI.
By developing the technical specifications needed to im-
plement the Act’s technical provisions in this way, ESOs can
leverage expertise of industry practitioners, as well as draw
upon existing international standards so that resulting speci-
fications are technically correct, reflective of the recent state
of the art and more readily implementable by industry ac-

tors. However, this presents several additional uncertainties:
• EU-wide coordination of national regulatory authorities:
Under the NLF, product legislation is enforced at the na-
tional level, primarily by relevant MSAs, where legisla-
tions in Annex I of the Act involve such MSAs when
products in their competent vertical sectors involve AI.
However, MSAs in each of these regulated sectors are al-
ready part of an EU wide Administrative Coordination
Group (AdCos) to coordinate and ensure consistent en-
forcement, and where the AdCos groups in turn coordi-
nate on common NLF implementation issues.
It is unclear if similar EU wide coordination is envisaged
for each of the separate areas introduced to the NLF un-
der Annex III of the AI Act, or if this will be coordinated
as a group via a network of the AI National Competent
Authorities (NCA). Further, it is unclear if issues raised
under Annex I sectoral enforcement will be escalated to
the AI Office and Board at EU level by that sector’s Ad-
ministrative Coordination Group or via the NCA. Sim-
ilarly, for consistency of GDPR, EU-wide coordination
happens through the European Data Protection Board
(EDPB) whose members are supervisory authorities. The
AI Act is unclear on whether the similarly defined Euro-
pean Artificial Intelligence Board (EAIB) in Article 65,
will involve EU-wide coordination bodies related to fun-
damental rights directly, or whether this is to occur via
the NCA. For example, in Ireland the national compe-
tent authority for the AI Act is yet to be announced while
there is a notified body already operating to serve the cer-
tification needs of the large medical device sector, and in
addition there are 10 different agencies and departments
covering the MSA role for the 20 Annex I legislative acts
as well as 9 fundamental rights protection bodies. There-
fore, the EU-wide coordination to implement the AI Act
involves numerous entities and is thus considerable.
• Limited representation in standards development: Stan-
dards development is a meticulous, lengthy and highly
technical process. Therefore, the bulk of participation
comes from large multinational companies that sustain
teams of suitably-experienced experts, whereas other less
well-resourced experts from NGOs, SMEs or academia
struggle to maintain effective level of contribution (Cuc-
curu 2019). This raises concerns that the resulting AI
harmonised standards from CEN/CENELEC JTC21 may
not sufficiently represent the interests of citizens and
SMEs in favour of the large companies that the Act must
also regulate (Veale and Borgesius 2021). Further, JTC21
is able to adopt standards directly from ISO/IEC, where
the subcommittee on AI (SC42) has been developing AI
standards since 2018, many of which align to topics in the
EC’s harmonised standards request, e.g. ISO/IEC 23894
on AI risk management (ISO/IEC 2023a) and ISO/IEC
24029-2 on AI robustness (ISO/IEC 2023b). However,
as these are developed by experts from a global mem-
bership of national standards bodies rather than just the
European-based ones, the representation of weaker Eu-
ropean actors may be further diluted.
• Lack of free access to harmonised standards: Standards
bodies such as ISO/IEC and CEN/CENELEC rely on
charging for access as means of funding to maintain
their convening and quality assurance functions, and
harmonised standards are typically high-demand items.
However, as harmonised standards essentially enter EU
law and are key to enforcing important consumer protec-
tions, paywall access became untenable and resulted in
court actions (Kamara 2022). The European Court of Jus-
tice delivered a judgment in Case C-588/21 P that there
was an overriding public interest in free access to har-
monised standards, and in response ISO/IEC have asked
to annul this decision (Case T-631/24), thereby casting
uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the current
model for harmonised standards.
• Developing standards with reference to legal require-
ments and ethical norms: ISO/IEC and CEN/CENELEC
guidelines prohibit addressing legal compliance so as
to avoid introducing barriers to trade in these specifi-
cations. Harmonised standards address this by includ-
ing a specific annex to map provisions in the standard to
specific legislative requirements. This arms-length treat-
ment and the perceived lack of democratic legitimacy in
standards development means that issues of fundamental
rights and ethics are limited to non-normative technical
reports (ISO/IEC 2022).
• Integrating horizontal and vertical standards develop-
ment: A key benefit of grounding harmonised standards
in international ISO/IEC standards is the support of-
fered for regulatory certification regimes, where confor-
mity assessment is based on the ISO 17000 series of
standards. This allows for use of standardised certifi-
cation assessments from authorised bodies that certify
against a given regulation and its harmonised standards
through “notification” (i.e. competent authorities assess
certification providers and “notify” them if deemed qual-
ified). Complementing this scheme is the harmonised
management system standard (MSS) template defined by
ISO/IEC (ISO/IEC 2024). This common template facil-
itates organisations combining adoption of MSSs from
different standards committees into a unified organisa-
tional management system, e.g. ISO/IEC 27001 for in-
formation security and ISO 42001 which is the MSS de-
veloped by SC42 for AI from the harmonised manage-
ment system. This however offers no guarantee that sim-
ilar concepts or control measures included from differ-
ent ISO/IEC standards committees are not in conflict, as
they are often developed at different times and as com-
mittees addressing horizontal technologies such as AI are
typically chartered separately to those addressing sec-
torial standards, such as ISO/TC 210 on health related
products. The ideal solution for a Joint Committee to be
formed between separate committees is tricky as there
are two sets of consensus forming and voting communi-
ties involved which makes it typically slower to establish
and complete standards project. To date, the harmonised
standards request to JTC21 has only sought horizontal
harmonised standards from JTC21, so the development
of harmonised standards specific to AI use in a vertical

domain such as medical devices may introduce uncer-
tainties in the timeliness and consistency of liaison be-
tween these committees on joint specifications.
Mapping a Regulatory Learning Space
Regulatory learning is a means by which technology regu-
lation can respond and adapt to rapid advances in the ca-
pabilities and use of the technologies subject to regulation.
It features in the EU’s smart regulation policies (European
Commission 2010), which aim to ensure in general that reg-
ulation achieves its policy objectives with the minimum reg-
ulatory burden on industry, society and public administra-
tion across the legislative lifecycle. The AI Act contains
many provisions that invoke a range regulatory learning and
revision mechanisms that include sharing and coordination
of enforcement actions between the Member State and reg-
ulatory bodies (Article 65,66); operating learning environ-
ments such a regulatory sandboxes (Article 57, 58, 59) and
real-world trials (Article 60); providing and revising sup-
porting technical specification (e.g. harmonised standards,
guidelines, codes of practice, codes of conduct or report-
ing templates); authoritative opinions from expert represen-
tative, i.e. advisory forum (Article 67) and scientific panels
(Article 68) and modification to the legal code through del-
egated acts (Article 97), implementing acts (Articles 41, 56,
58, 108, etc.) and periodic review and revision of the legis-
lation (Article 112).
Regulatory sandboxes have previously found some suc-
cess with financial regulation (Ahern 2021) and the AI Act
requires at least one in operation in each Member State (Ar-
ticle 57, 58, 59). Sandboxes allow regulators and prospec-
tive regulated actors to experience, assess and report on
technical measures and their documentation. This is con-
ducted within time and scope-limited constraints set by reg-
ulatory bodies to inform the improvement of implementation
on both sides. However, as part of a Member State’s com-
petence, their scoping and resourcing of sandboxes 1 may
be constrained by national policy priorities, which may re-
sult in gaps or duplications across the resulting population
of sandboxes. Experiences from finance sector also show
the benefits of resolving ambiguities in regulatory require-
ments and terminology through collaborative learning are-
nas that do not need to operate under the ambit of regulators
(Buckley et al. 2020). Mechanisms such as living labs and
test-beds can also offer complementary arenas for regula-
tory learning with different degrees of technology maturity,
regulator involvement, resourcing models, access routes and
stakeholder engagement (Kert, Vebrova, and Schade 2022)
as well as for exploring non-technical governance innova-
tion (Engels, Wentland, and Pfotenhauer 2019). Correspond-
ingly, the AI Act includes oversight rules for real-world test-
ing of technical measures using human subjects (Articles
60, 61). However, the degree of autonomy on sandboxes
available to AI National Competent Authorities and the po-
tential for valuable regulatory learning from other activities
presents a major coordination problem. This falls into the re-
1https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/ai-regulatory-sandbox-
approaches-eu-member-state-overview/
mit of the European AI Board (Article 66) and the EC. Such
coordination will need to be handled transparently and sys-
tematically to ensure that the many uncertainties raised by
the Act across different protections and sectors are addressed
in a timely, predictable, efficient and legitimate manner. Fur-
ther, the risk-based approach adopted from the NLF is at its
core an adaptive mechanism for managing uncertainty. Pre-
deployment certification aims to ensure that known or rea-
sonably foreseeable risks are sufficiently mitigated within
the available state of the art in technical measures. Where
new risks materialise or mitigation measures fail in unan-
ticipated ways, the market surveillance system enables such
knowledge to be disseminated across the market to rapidly
correct or remove affected products and to motivate invest-
ment in corresponding mitigation measures. We therefore
view the certification and surveillance activities for imple-
menting the Act (including penalties and appeals to courts)
as part of its regulatory learning mechanisms.
These trends in adoption of regulatory learning coupled
with the uncertainties in the Act indicate that a broad and
structured framework for regulatory learning is required to
enable the efficient, timely and stakeholder-inclusive system
for resolving uncertainties and adapting to technological ad-
vances. This would allow impacted actors to coordinate to
analyse the information sharing requirements between dif-
ferent forms of regulatory learning, to efficiently allocate
and schedule private and public resources to learning activi-
ties and to minimise wasteful duplication of such activities.
To this end, we propose a framework developed from the
provisions of the Act and consisting of a taxonomy of ac-
tors who will participate in learning activities that are or-
ganised into a regulatory learning space where the specific
learning activities are situated by classes of protections be-
ing addressed, the types of AI systems involved and classes
of learning activities.
The classification of regulatory learning actors con-
tains Value-chain Actors, Oversight Authorities and Affected
Stakeholders. The class of Value-chain Actors consists of
operators of AI systems (defined in Article 3(8) to encom-
pass providers, deployers, product manufacturers and their
authorised representatives, distributors and importers) as
well as the suppliers of data, AI models and other compo-
nents with compliance implications (Article 25). The class
of Oversight Authorities consists of bodies and agencies that
make decisions on the policy lifecycle for the Act. They are
classified as EU bodies, Member State bodies and those op-
erating independently of the EU and Member States, such
as ESOs. It includes therefore those involved in investigating
and making decisions on compliance and in the development
of official guidelines, regulatory and legal opinions, delegat-
ed/implementing acts, or harmonised standards. The class of
Affected Stakeholders consists of natural persons who ben-
efit or perceive they may benefit from the Act’s protections
of their health, safety, fundamental rights including democ-
racy, the rule of law and environmental protection. In this,
we also include groups and non-governmental organisations
advocating for collective interests on protections.
The efficiency and legitimacy of the AI Act’s imple-
mentation, given the complex array of the actors involved,

Figure 1: Parameterised Learning Space for the AI Act
will depend on the networks and patterns of information
exchange, normative guidance and accountability mecha-
nisms. We have identified that there are several uncertainties
in play already that will affect not only what information
needs to be communicated between actors, but also the in-
volvement of actors in patterns and triggers for regulatory
communications and the learnings they convey, which rep-
resents a large complex network for regulatory interactions.
Therefore, as visualised in Figure 1, we propose a struc-
ture of three parametrised axes within which the regulatory
learning space can be subdivided, actors’ involvement can
be planned and resourced, and interplay between different
forms of regulatory learning can be managed.
The proposed axes, derived from the provisions of the
Act, are:(1) the types of AI system, (2) the types of protec-
tions offered and (3) the types of regulatory learning activ-
ities in which actors may participate. The AI System Types
breaks down as: prohibited; High Risk AI (HRAI) classified
under any of the 20 vertical sectorial legislative acts in An-
nex I; HRAI classified under the 8 areas and 24 sub-areas
in Annex III; HRAI treated by MSA as non-high-risk (Arti-
cle 80) under derogations of Article 6(3); deployed HRAI
with substantial modifications; GPAI systems; GPAI sys-
tems with systematic risks; AI subject to transparency obli-
gations and those subject to voluntary codes of conduct.Pro-
tections cover those for health, safety, fundamental rights,
democracy and the environment. Finally, regulatory learn-
ing activities are classified as: those undertaken by individ-
uals, primarily related by AI literacy and regulatory compe-
tences; organisational learning required of value-chain ac-
tors prior to interactions with oversight authorities; regula-
tory learning resulting from such enforcement interactions

and meta-learning that results from observing the outcomes
of other learning activities and applying it to developing or
revising rules and recommendations to which those activi-
ties are subject (Kooiman and Jentoft 2009).
In Figure 1, we then map out the types of possible in-
volvement by the different framework actors with different
levels of learning activities, thereby laying out the make-up
of the learning arenas where these activities will be under-
taken and where different actor classes would be involved
in learning activities as implied by the Act. This differen-
tiates between actor classes that are merely participants in
the activity and those that are responsible for the conduct of
the activity, including the future adoption of its learning out-
comes by that particular actor. The mapping also differenti-
ates actors that observe that class of learning activity and use
the collective learning outcomes to revise the governance ar-
rangements for that class, i.e. to conduct meta-learning. In
this way, the set of actors making up the arena in which spe-
cific learning activities are undertaken can be identified in
order to plan and efficiently support such activities. The are-
nas for meta-learning are not directly elaborated in this way,
since their make-up is more accurately informed by the or-
ganisation and enforcement learning activities from which
they learn. This mapping is therefore expanded separately in
Table 1. By modelling the interactions between actors and
activities involved in implementing the AI Act as classes of
learners and learning activities, we illuminate how the Act’s
extensive system of “smart regulation” mechanisms will ef-
ficiently and legitimately address known uncertainties.
However, two important issues arise as a result: first, re-
sponsibility for defining learning goals for individuals is not
well-defined. Though Article 4 of the Act requires AI liter-
acy in personnel of AI operators, how this should be exe-
cuted through formal courses, experiential learning (Madaio
et al. 2024) and competency reviews is undefined. The pro-
fessional competence of oversight authority personnel is al-
ready generally defined under the NLF, e.g. as mentioned
in the Act for national competent authorities (Article 70(3))
and notifying bodies (Article 31(11)). However, the respon-
sibility to specify these competences that must draw from
vertical legislation of Annex I, horizontal AI provisions and
standards and fundamental right concerns resides diffused
across the EU and Member States (Recital 20). Further, there
is no responsibility to promote AI literacy requirements to
upstream suppliers. Independent competency definition ac-
tivities are emerging, e.g. International Association of Pri-
vacy Professions2 and at JTC21 in preliminary investigation
into “competence requirements for AI ethicist profession-
als” and “Guidance for upskilling organisations on AI ethics
and social concerns”, but its integration with EU and Mem-
ber States responsibilities is currently unclear.
Second, regulatory sandboxes are primarily designed to
support the learning by regulated parties in order to help
manage the risk to their innovation and investment plans in
cooperation with regulators (OECD 2023), and often also
need to support Member States industrial policy to justify in-
vestment. Therefore, the systematic gathering of evidence to
2https://iapp.org/resources/topics/eu-ai-act/
support consensus building for developing the required im-
plementing and delegated acts (Novelli et al. 2024) and as-
sessment and review of the Act (Article 112) in the long term
will require coordination and integration outcomes from
across the broad range of regulatory meta-learning identified
in Table 1, based on the analysis in (kaizenner 2024). The
table identifies where a useful information flow is likely be-
tween instances of the organisational and enforcement learn-
ing activities and the meta-learning activities listed. It also
indicates where the outcome of those learning activities will
place additional requirement on the other learning activities.
It can be seen that there is a high chance of such useful
information flow between organisational and enforcement
learning activities and meta-learning. In particular, informa-
tion flows to and from most type of enforcement learning to
meta-learning activities are likely as there will be cross over
where HRAI enforcement informed GPAI related activities
and vice versa based on the increasing prevalence of GPAI
use in areas treated as HRAI and HRAI oversight serving as
a source of evidence on GPAI risks and thereby feedback
on their classification. This dense pattern of bidirectional
information exchange to and from meta-learning reinforces
the need for systematic support for finding, exchanging and
meaningfully consuming the outcome of different learning
activities in an efficient manner.
It can also be seen that involvement of affected stakehold-
ers is a widespread expectation across activities, prompted
by their importance in understanding rights protection and
the legitimacy their involvement may offer. However, they
are offered relatively little formal role in the Act beyond the
right to lodge a complaint with an MSA on rights protection
breach (Article 85), to request an explanation of an AI deci-
sion (Article 86) and to benefit from whistle-blower protec-
tions (Article 87). However, structuring their participation
in the design of technical and governance measures is chal-
lenging to implement (Groves et al. 2023).
Learning via Information Exchange
Any attempt to ground technology ethics in co-regulation
with democratic legitimacy requires compliance to be
achieved in a stable manner and implemented efficiently
(Ferretti 2022). As we discussed earlier, the AI Act currently
presents major legal uncertainties, especially in the effec-
tiveness of protections across the broad range of fundamen-
tal rights and in how its horizontal provisions will integrate
with vertical enforcement practices of the NLF. While not
addressing these uncertainties directly, the Act does already
contain a wide range of measures to update its provision in
response to technological advances and improved evidence
on risks. We do not aim to predict changes arising from reg-
ulatory learning, but instead offer a structured framework
for considering the Act’s provisions as a system of interact-
ing regulatory learning activities. In this way, we can con-
sider how such learnings can be supported in a predictable
and efficient manner. In particular, we now consider how in-
formation exchange between different learning activities can
support efficiency and legitimacy. Efficiency may be derived
by improving the semantic and syntactic interoperability of
information representing the context and outcomes of learn-

Table 1: Information flow between organisational and enforcement learning activities and meta learning activities with signs
indicating: ← as instance of learning activity informs meta-learning activity, → as outcome of meta-learning activity places
requirements on instances of learning activities; ↔ as both these apply; . (dot) as no interactions; and acronyms as DA for
Delegated Act; IA for Implementing Act; and [] (square brackets) indicating AI Act article
I. Meta-learning activities II. Organisational learning activities III. Enforcement learning activities
a b c d e f g a b c d e f g
a: Develop harmonised standards [40] ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ←
b: Revise Anx III derogations [6,97] DA ↔ ↔ ↔ . ← . ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
c: Revise Anx I and III [7,97] DA → ← ↔ . ← . ← ← ← ← ↔ ↔ ← ←
d: Revise technical documentation spec
Anx IV [6,97] DA ↔ ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ←
e: Revise conformity assessment Anx VI
and VII [43,97] DA ↔ ← ↔ ↔ ↔ . ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ → ↔
f: Revise declaration of conformity spec
Anx V [47,97] DA ↔ ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ← . ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ → →
g: Revise GPAI threshold and criteria in
Anx XIII [52,97] DA ↔ ↔ ← → . . ← ← ← ← ← ← ↔ ↔
h: Revise GPAI tech document Anx XI and
downstream in Anx XII [53,97] DA ↔ ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
i: Develop common specification [41,98]
IA ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ←
j: Develop spec for reg sandboxes [58,98]
IA ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ↔ ← ← ←
k: Develop spec for real-world testing
[60,98] IA ← ← ← ← ← ↔ ↔ ← ← ← ← ↔ ← ←
l: Develop template for post market moni-
toring plans [72,98] IA ← ← ← ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ↔
m: Develop rule for GPAI evaluation
[92,98] IA ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ↔ ↔
n: Develop criteria non-high-risk Anx III
systems [6] ↔ ↔ ← . . . ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
o: Develop QMS guidelines for microen-
terprises [63] ↔ ↔ ← ↔ ↔ → ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ . .
p: Develop guidelines HRAI compliance
implementation [96] ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ←
q: Develop template for tech document by
small and micro enterprises [11] ↔ ← ↔ ↔ ↔ → ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ↔
r: Develop model contract terms for AIP
and suppliers [25] ↔ ← ← ↔ ↔ . ← ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
s: Encourage development of benchmarks
and development methodologies [15(2)] ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ↔ → ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
t: Develop template for GPAI training
copyright report [53(1d)] ↔ ↔ ← ↔ . → ← . ↔ ↔ ↔ ← ↔ ↔
u: Develop objective and participative
methodology for the evaluation of risk lev-
els [112(11)]
↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
v: Develop GPAI code of practice [56] ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
w: Revise AI Act [112] ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
ing activities. This not only supports exchange of such in-
formation between AI operators and oversight authorities,
but with suppliers upstream in the value chain. Legitimacy
can be derived from adopting open standards for such infor-
mation exchange and doing so via platforms that maximise
transparency for affected stakeholders and other operators,
with the necessary restrictions of commercial confidential-
ity. Standardised information and structured information-
sharing practices may enable affected stakeholders, their ad-
vocates, and independent researchers to make public-interest
comparisons—such as evaluating the outcomes of individ-
ual AI training processes or assessing the appropriateness

of thresholds used to measure specific types of harm during
system testing.
With this view, we consider the AI Act as also advocating
the collection and use of specific knowledge to both deter-
mine and ensure compliance, as well as to promote a culture
of organisational oversight through the use of this informa-
tion. An example of this is Articles 9 to 15 where specific
categories of information are required to be maintained and
used towards indicated processes. However, given that the
AI Act ecosystem (or the AI value chain) will mostly con-
sist of multiple entities who develop, provide, and use AI
systems, and based on the application of the learning loops
from before, we can see how the information required to be
maintained by the AI Act will also be required to be shared
with other stakeholders outside of the immediate organisa-
tional context. At the same time, the specific nature of this
information (e.g. technical or legal) also shows challenges
in effectively utilising it within the organisation where there
will be different levels of expertise and the decision-making
person may not always be capable of understanding it.
Thus, we point out that effective enforcement of the AI
Act depends on the information sharing of relevant stake-
holders, and that doing so efficiently is a necessary regula-
tory learning in this space. However, the primary challenge
in developed shared information modelling approaches is
the divergence in use-cases and requirements, particularly
across sectors. For addressing this, we require a common
foundational ontologyaligned with the AI Act itself that pro-
vides common terminology and basis for developing further
approaches that can be provisional while the AI Act is being
initially interpreted, and then progressively be extended as
certainty of regulatory interpretation is achieved. For such
approaches developed in parallel across use-cases, it would
be desirable to share information by ‘aligning’ or ‘mapping’
the information so that it can be ‘translated’ and utilised con-
veniently.
To achieve all of this, we believe the best solution is the
use of standards-based information models and processes
developed to share them – specifically semantic web stan-
dards (World Wide Web Consortium 2024) and their use
in data portals that enable cataloguing information and de-
ploying a shared infrastructure that promotes data availabil-
ity and leads to innovative solutions based on its reuse.
The EU has successfully utilised this approach in its Open
Data Portal which federates datasets from national and re-
gional portals in Member States. The EU’s vision of data
spaces is grounded in a similar argument which entirely re-
lies on shared information and processes to achieve greater
efficiency through consistency in shared contexts. The EU
Commission’s European Interoperability Framework (EIF)
was developed with a similar goal for creating interoperable
digital public services. We posit that a similar approach for
the AI value chain, based on a focus on achieving the nec-
essary knowledge exchange for AI Act compliance, should
be considered an essential part of regulatory learning in this
space. Another example is the EU’s eProcurement Ontology
(Publications Office 2024) which provides a standardised
ontology of concepts for interoperable modelling of procure-
ment data and processes based on EU regulations and direc-
tives. The ontology caters to common terminology between
stakeholders, and enables the development of common tool-
ing, platforms, and services that function both before and af-
ter the award. A similar effort for the implementation of the
AI Act can be envisioned that functions ‘end-to-end’ across
the value chain and assists in the definition of interopera-
ble information for facilitating sharing between stakehold-
ers, and to formalise the exchange of knowledge necessary
for regulatory learning within and across the defined learn-
ing loops. More importantly, it can function as the common
technical foundation for the implementation of future regu-
lations and directives which will build on top of the AI Act in
both horizontal (general) and vertical (sectorial) directions.
We point to examples of feasible and sustainable community
efforts where such use of semantic web standards towards le-
gal knowledge modelling has been successful in adapting to
evolving regulations and standards (Pandit, Lindquist, and
Krog 2024; Pandit et al. 2025).
Thus, we argue that the development of an interoperable
framework is an investment in the regulation and will aid
regulatory learning processes for both organisations and pol-
icy makers by giving them a common point of reference for
developing further obligations and smoothing over report-
ing obligations. This type of ‘harmonisation’ is critically re-
quired given the recent Draghi report outlined reduction in
regulatory reporting as one of the key factors essential to
ensuring EU competitiveness, and where the Commission’s
response agrees with this view as it has tabled an ‘omnibus
regulation’ in its agenda for the 2025 work program that re-
duces reporting and red-tape by 25%. We interpret this as the
Commission aiming to make regulatory enforcement more
efficient rather than diluting the regulatory obligations and
protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. Thus, our ar-
gument for using regulatory learning as a tool to systematise
compliance processes across the ecosystem and across reg-
ulations should be considered an important factor for such
future policy-making decisions.
To achieve this, we envision the reuse of existing stan-
dardisation processes, such as in ISO/IEC, CEN/CENELEC,
and W3C to develop appropriate agreements on information
exchange formats and processes based on using them. This
also provides a way for the integration of information re-
quired or involved in the use of harmonised standards for
the AI Act within the proposed interoperability framework.
Discussion and Further Work
We argue that the technology pacing problem coupled with
uncertainties related to fundamental rights protections and
integration of horizontal provisions and vertical enforcement
requires a systematic approach to regulatory learning for the
AI Act. We therefore proposed a conceptual, parametrised
space for locating instances of learning activities to aim in
their planning, resourcing, coordination and information ex-
change. To ensure regulatory learning is timely, efficient and
legitimate we recommend:
1. The development of open, standards-based and machine
readable information models for the exchange of the con-
text and learning outcomes of learning activities;

2. Maximising opportunities for sharing instance of such
learning outcomes according to FAIR principles, e.g. ac-
companying declaration of conformity used in public ad-
ministration in an EU database;
3. Where confidentiality restricts open sharing of learning
outcomes, encourage the use of data spaces for controlled
access to information sharing.
Considering the AI Act as a learning framework in this
way may portend a “regulatory turn” in the field of AI ethics,
where questions focus on the efficient operation of such hor-
izontal regulation and its effectiveness in protecting funda-
mental rights. In the context of the Act, such a regulatory
turn in AI ethics may refocus voluntary codes more specifi-
cally on fundamental rights protections in order to leverage
the learning and evidence that will arise from the compli-
ance actions for high-risk and GPAI systems. Such a reg-
ulatory turn may have import beyond the EU both due to
the extraterritorial impact on international AI value chains
known as the “Brussels effect”, and the widespread compa-
rable legal protections in place across different jurisdictions
for fundamental, or human, rights and corresponding legiti-
macy in comparison to proposed ethical frameworks for AI
(Lewis et al. 2020).
While our analysis is limited to the scope of the AI Act,
given the breadth of recent EU digital regulations, the next
step is to explore regulatory learning systems that can ad-
dress the interplay of the Act and related digital and prod-
uct legislations. As discussed above, there is coordination
of the interplay between the AI Act and GDPR and also
some options for coordination with Annex I product legis-
lation under NLF. However, there is potential interplay with
other EU law where their interactions with the Act have not
yet received close attention - such as on the cybersecurity
of AI (Article 15) with the Cyber Resilience Act 2024/2847
and the Network and Information Systems (NIS2) Directive
2022/2555. Another avenue for exploring coordination in-
volves the system for accrediting trusted research used in
the Digital Services Act 2022/2065 to be mobilised for re-
searchers to advance AI and data auditing techniques with
HRAI and GPAI providers. More broadly, effective imple-
mentation of AI quality management systems and risk as-
sessments, especially for emerging impact on fundamen-
tal rights can also feed in fruitfully for provider obliga-
tions under liability legislation including the General Prod-
uct Safety Regulation 2023/988, the Product Liability Di-
rective 2024/2853, class actions via the Representative Ac-
tion Directive 2020/1828, and Corporate Sustainability Re-
porting Directive 2022/2464, as well as the Corporate Sus-
tainability Due Diligence Directive 2024/1760 on environ-
mental and social reporting. The European Data Protection
Supervisor has recently proposed a digital clearing house
to facilitate multilateral cooperation between authorities in-
volved in enforcing the EU digital aquis (EPDS 2025). Ex-
panding our learning space model as an open data resource
may offer a useful resource for such coordination but also a
mean for engaging affected stakeholder and civil society on
these complex issues.
The scope of the analysis of information exchange could
be expanded further to include AI risk and compliance
frameworks as they emerge outside of the EU jurisdiction
such as the US, China, Canada, UK and Singapore. Sand-
boxes are already being adopted internationally as these
other jurisdictions grapple with similar AI risk uncertain-
ties. Analysing the potential for learning interchange be-
tween sandboxes across jurisdictions may help assess where
enforcement of one measure already adequately offers out-
comes intended by the other or where minor incompatibil-
ities could be readily addressed by bodies tasked with ad-
dressing issues raised as part of international trade agree-
ments.
Finally, the profound impacts AI seems likely to bring
to many aspects of our lives may result in the enforcement
of the AI Act exposing new vectors where different funda-
mental rights come into conflict in unanticipated ways. In-
sights may arise from cases brought before national courts
or the CJEU, or where a MSA or the AI Office makes
a ruling based on an identified fundamental rights breach.
Here, learning could be facilitated by cataloguing AI funda-
mental rights opinions from these different types of learn-
ing together, contrasting with the more siloed public cata-
logues related to existing rights protecting frameworks such
as GDPR Supervisory Authorities and the ECtHR. This may
support accelerated legal scholarship on topics such as clar-
ification of circumstances under which the AI Act does or
does not support fundamental rights protections and under-
standing where different protections may come into conflict
(including the freedom to conduct a business).
Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from the European Com-
mission’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Pro-
gramme under grant agreement No. 101177579 (FORSEE)
and from the ADAPT Centre for Digital Media Technology,
which is funded by Research Ireland and is co-funded under
the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through
Grant#13/RC/2106 P2.
References
Ahern, D. 2021. Regulatory Lag, Regulatory Friction and
Regulatory Transition as FinTech Disenablers: Calibrating
an EU Response to the Regulatory Sandbox Phenomenon.
European Business Organization Law Review , 22(3): 395–
432.
AI Act. 2024. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending
Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU)
No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU)
2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and
(EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text with EEA
relevance). Legislative Body: CONSIL, EP.
Buckley, R.; Arner, D.; Veidt, R.; and Zetzsche, D. 2020.
Building Fintech Ecosystems: Regulatory Sandboxes, Inno-
vation Hubs and Beyond. Washington University Journal of
Law & Policy, 61(1): 055–098.

Corrˆea, N. K.; Galv˜ao, C.; Santos, J. W.; Pino, C. D.; Pinto,
E. P.; Barbosa, C.; Massmann, D.; Mambrini, R.; Galv˜ao, L.;
Terem, E.; and Oliveira, N. d. 2023. Worldwide AI ethics: A
review of 200 guidelines and recommendations for AI gov-
ernance. Patterns, 4(10). Publisher: Elsevier.
Cuccuru, P. 2019. Interest Representation in European Stan-
dardisation: The Case of CEN and CENELEC.
De Hert, P.; and Korenica, F. 2012. The doctrine of equiv-
alent protection: Its life and legitimacy before and after the
European Union’s accession to the European convention on
human rights. German Law Journal, 13(7): 874–895.
Engels, F.; Wentland, A.; and Pfotenhauer, S. M. 2019. Test-
ing future societies? Developing a framework for test beds
and living labs as instruments of innovation governance.Re-
search Policy, 48: 103826.
EPDS. 2025. Towards a Digital Clearinghouse 2.0 | Euro-
pean Data Protection Supervisor.
European Commission. 2010. Communication From The
Commission To The European Parliament, The Council, The
European Economic And Social Committee And The Com-
mittee Of The Regions Smart Regulation In The European
Union.
European Commission. 2023. C(2023)3215 – Standardi-
sation request M/593 Commission Implementing Decision
of 22.5.2023 on a standardisation request to the European
Committee for Standardisation and the European Commit-
tee for Electrotechnical Standardisation in support of Union
policy on artificial intelligence .
European Commission, Directorate-General for Internal
Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs. 2022. Com-
mission notice The ‘Blue Guide’ on the implementation of
EU product rules 2022. 2022/C 247/01.
Evers, C. 2024. Talking past each other? Navigating dis-
course on ethical AI: Comparing the discourse on ethical AI
policy by Big Tech companies and the European Commis-
sion. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fair-
ness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’24, 1885–
1896. New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery. ISBN 9798400704505.
Ferretti, T. 2022. An Institutionalist Approach to AI Ethics:
Justifying the Priority of Government Regulation over Self-
Regulation. Moral Philosophy and Politics, 9(2): 239–265.
Publisher: De Gruyter.
Fjeld, J.; Achten, N.; Hilligoss, H.; Nagy, A.; and Srikumar,
M. 2020. Principled Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Con-
sensus in Ethical and Rights-Based Approaches to Principles
for AI.
Fornasier, M. 2015. The impact of EU fundamental rights
on private relationships: direct or indirect effect? European
Review of Private Law, 23(1): 29.
Frantziou, E. 2015. The horizontal effect of the charter of
fundamental rights of the EU: rediscovering the reasons for
horizontality. European Law Journal, 21(5): 657.
Frantziou, E. 2019. The Horizontal Effect of Fundamental
Rights in the European Union: A Constitutional Analysis .
Oxford University Press.
Golpayegani, D.; Hupont, I.; Panigutti, C.; Pandit, H. J.;
Schade, S.; O’Sullivan, D.; and Lewis, D. 2024. AI Cards:
Towards an Applied Framework for Machine-Readable AI
and Risk Documentation Inspired by the EU AI Act. In
Jensen, M.; Lauradoux, C.; and Rannenberg, K., eds.,
Privacy Technologies and Policy , 48–72. Springer Nature
Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-68024-3.
Grace, K.; Stewart, H.; Sandk ¨uhler, J. F.; Thomas, S.;
Weinstein-Raun, B.; and Brauner, J. 2024. Thousands of
AI Authors on the Future of AI. ArXiv:2401.02843 [cs].
Groves, L.; Peppin, A.; Strait, A.; and Brennan, J. 2023.
Going public: the role of public participation approaches
in commercial AI labs. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
FAccT ’23, 1162–1173. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701924.
Hagendorff, T. 2020. The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation
of Guidelines. Minds and Machines, 30(1): 99–120.
ISO/IEC. 2022. ISO/IEC TR 24368:2022 Information tech-
nology — Artificial intelligence — Overview of ethical and
societal concerns.
ISO/IEC. 2023a. ISO/IEC 23894:2023 Information technol-
ogy — Artificial intelligence — Guidance on risk manage-
ment.
ISO/IEC. 2023b. ISO/IEC 24029-2:2023 Artificial intelli-
gence (AI) — Assessment of the robustness of neural net-
works — Part 2: Methodology for the use of formal meth-
ods.
ISO/IEC. 2024. ISO/IEC Directive Part 1, Consolidated ISO
Supplement — Procedures for the technical work — Proce-
dures specific to ISO, 12th Edition.
Jobin, A.; Ienca, M.; and Vayena, E. 2019. The global land-
scape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence,
1(9): 389–399. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
kaizenner. 2024. The AI Act: responsibilities of the EU
Member States.
Kamara, I. 2022. General Court EU: Commercial interests
block the right to access European harmonised standards.
Journal of Standardisation, 1.
Keber, T.; Schwartmann, R.; and Zenner, K. 2024. The
EU AI Act: A Practice-Oriented Interpretation: An initial
overview. Computer Law Review International, 25(4): 114–
120. Publisher: Verlag Dr. Otto Schmidt.
Kert, K.; Vebrova, M.; and Schade, S. 2022. Regulatory
learning in experimentation spaces.
Kooiman, J.; and Jentoft, S. 2009. Meta-Governance:
Values, Norms and Principles, and the Making of Hard
Choices. Public Administration, 87(4): 818–836. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1467-
9299.2009.01780.x.
Lenaerts, K. 2012. Exploring the limits of the EU charter of
fundamental rights. European Constitutional Law Review ,
8(3): 375–403.
Lewis, D.; Hogan, L.; Filip, D.; and Wall, P. J. 2020. Global
Challenges in the Standardization of Ethics for Trustworthy
AI. Journal of ICT Standardization, 123–150.

Madaio, M.; Kapania, S.; Qadri, R.; Wang, D.; Zaldivar, A.;
Denton, R.; and Wilcox, L. 2024. Learning about Respon-
sible AI On-The-Job: Learning Pathways, Orientations, and
Aspirations. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’24,
1544–1558. New York, NY , USA: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery. ISBN 9798400704505.
Mazzini, G.; and Scalzo, S. 2023. The proposal for the Arti-
ficial Intelligence Act: considerations around some key con-
cepts. Camardi (a cura di), La via europea per l’Intelligenza
artificiale.
Medical Devices Regulation. 2017. Regulation (EU)
2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive
2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regula-
tion (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives
90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC.
Novelli, C.; Hacker, P.; Morley, J.; Trondal, J.; and Floridi,
L. 2024. A Robust Governance for the AI Act: AI Office, AI
Board, Scientific Panel, and National Authorities. European
Journal of Risk Regulation, 1–25.
OECD. 2023. Regulatory sandboxes in artificial intelli-
gence.
Palladino, N. 2023. A ‘biased’ emerging governance regime
for artificial intelligence? How AI ethics get skewed mov-
ing from principles to practices.Telecommunications Policy,
47(5): 102479.
Pandit, H. J.; Esteves, B.; P. Krog, G.; Ryan, P.; Gol-
payegani, D.; and Flake, J. 2025. Data Privacy V ocabulary
(DPV) – Version 2.0. In Demartini, G.; Hose, K.; Acosta,
M.; Palmonari, M.; Cheng, G.; Skaf-Molli, H.; Ferranti, N.;
Hern´andez, D.; and Hogan, A., eds., The Semantic Web –
ISWC 2024, 171–193. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
ISBN 978-3-031-77847-6.
Pandit, H. J.; Lindquist, J.; and Krog, G. P. 2024. Imple-
menting ISO/IEC TS 27560:2023 Consent Records and Re-
ceipts for GDPR and DGA. In Jensen, M.; Lauradoux, C.;
and Rannenberg, K., eds., Privacy Technologies and Policy,
228–251. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-
3-031-68024-3.
Prechal, S. 2020. Horizontal direct effect of the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the EU. Revista de Derecho Comu-
nitario Europeo, 24(66): 407–426.
Publications Office. 2024. The eProcurement Ontology.
Schultz, M. D.; Conti, L. G.; and Seele, P. 2024. Dig-
ital ethicswashing: a systematic review and a process-
perception-outcome framework. AI and Ethics.
Spaventa, E. 2018. Should we “harmonize” fundamental
rights in the EU? Some reflections about minimum standards
and fundamental rights protection in the EU composite con-
stitutional system. Common Market Law Review, 55(4): 997.
Tartaro, A. 2023. Towards European Standards Supporting
the AI Act: Alignment Challenges on the Path to Trustwor-
thy AI. In Proceedings of the AISB Convention, 98–106.
Veale, M.; and Borgesius, F. Z. 2021. Demystifying the
Draft EU Artificial Intelligence Act — Analysing the good,
the bad, and the unclear elements of the proposed approach.
Computer Law Review International , 22(4): 97–112. Pub-
lisher: Verlag Dr. Otto Schmidt.
Viljanen, M. 2023. A Horizontal Meta-effect? Theorising
Human Rights in the AI Act and the Corporate Sustainabil-
ity Due Diligence Directive. In YSEC Yearbook of Socio-
Economic Constitutions 2023: Law and the Governance of
Artificial Intelligence, 117. Springer.
Wachter, S.; Mittelstadt, B.; and Russell, C. 2021. Why fair-
ness cannot be automated: Bridging the gap between EU
non-discrimination law and AI. Computer Law & Security
Review, 41: 105567.
World Wide Web Consortium, W. 2024. Data catalog vo-
cabulary (DCAT).
Xenidis, R.; and Senden, L. 2020. EU non-discrimination
law in the era of artificial intelligence: Mapping the chal-
lenges of algorithmic discrimination. Kluwer Law Interna-
tional.