Artificial intelligence and technological unemployment: Understanding 
trends, technology ’ s adverse roles, and current mitigation guidelines
Meher Nigar
a
, Jannatul Ferdous Juli
a
, Uttam Golder
a , *
, Mohammad Jahangir Alam
b , *
,  
Mohammad Kamal Hossain
b
a
Department of Finance and Banking, Jashore University of Science and Technology, Jashore 7408, Bangladesh
b
Department of Accounting and Information systems, Jashore University of Science and Technology, Jashore 7408, Bangladesh
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Artificial intelligence
Technological unemployment
Open innovation in employment
Open innovation complexity
ABSTRACT
As artificial intelligence (AI) and automation continue to reshape industries, concerns about technological un -
employment are intensifying. This study employs a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) guided by the PRISMA 
framework to examine peer-reviewed literature from the Scopus database (2015 – July 09, 2025). It identifies 
three core themes: (1) trends in AI-induced labor displacement, including task automation, skill polarization, and 
industry-specific disruptions in sectors such as healthcare, education, and creative industries; (2) the adverse 
roles of AI technologies, particularly in affecting white-collar professionals, gig workers, and freelancers by 
increasing precarity and skill mismatches; and (3) existing mitigation strategies, including responsible AI 
guidelines proposed by governments, institutions, and firms aimed at balancing technological advancement with 
employment protection. While a growing body of policy responses encourages human-AI complementarity, 
current measures remain fragmented and insufficient to address the structural risks of workforce displacement. 
This study presents a comprehensive synthesis of the evolving relationship between AI and employment, high -
lighting key areas for further inquiry and policy development.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, with the numerous advantages of technology, it also has 
adverse effects on society ( Krishna, 2024 ). A machine that possesses 
cognitive abilities similar to those of a person is called artificial intelli -
gence ( Cao et al., 2025; Goyal and Aneja, 2020; Kassa and Worku, 2025; 
Prasetyo et al., 2025; Saleem et al., 2024 ). The development of cognitive 
robots driven by artificial intelligence and modern information tech -
nologies has drastically changed people ’ s lives and careers ( Nguyen and 
Vo, 2022 ). In the early 20th century, stories about robots and other 
automated machines imitating human intellect helped people become 
familiar with artificial intelligence and its progression ( Maity, 2022 ). 
Nowadays, AI is being utilized in various sectors, including food pro -
cessing and its delivery systems, as well as robotic cars ( Panichakarn 
et al., 2024; Yaiprasert and Hidayanto, 2024 ). The quick development of 
AI and associated technologies has sparked a global conversation on 
how these technologies affect several aspects of society, most notably 
employment as AI as an element of financial technology (FinTech) 
( Alam et al., 2025; Barua et al., 2025; Golder et al., 2024; Golder and 
Barua, 2025 ) playing disruptive roles in many high-tech, medium level 
and SME industries ( Abu Talib et al., 2025 ; Ali et al., 2024 ; De Oliveira 
Neto et al., 2025 ; Lada, Chekima, Karim, et al., 2023 ; Ro ˇsa et al., 2025 ). 
Traditionally, economic theories and labor market dynamics have been 
employed to examine unemployment, with an emphasis on human 
adaptability, education, and skill development. However, the emer -
gence of AI impacts the existing employment theories, thereby incor -
porating AI into several sectors that present revolutionary prospects and 
noteworthy obstacles. Examining how AI affects employment patterns 
reveals a paradigm shift that reshapes the workforce, raising concerns 
about job displacement for workers and policymakers, as well as op -
portunities for innovation. However, several studies suggest that AI may 
raise cybersecurity concerns and increase complexity, necessitating 
human supervision ( Alawamleh et al., 2024; Sidek et al., 2024 ).
The stability of the macroeconomic environment and financial 
market is crucial for any business ( Biswas et al., 2023; Golder et al., 
2020; Golder, Sheikh, et al., 2021; Shahriar et al., 2024 ), as it signifi -
cantly influences the financing of various sectors (P. Ghosh et al., 2024 ; 
Golder, Sultana, et al., 2021 ; Golder et al., 2023 ; Hossain and Golder, 
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: uttamgolder@gmail.com (U. Golder), jahangir.sr_ais@just.edu.bd (M.J. Alam). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market,  
and Complexity
journal homepage: www.scien cedirect.co m/journal/jo urnal-of-ope n-innovatio n-technolo gy- 
market-and -complexity
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2025.100607
Received 29 March 2025; Received in revised form 27 July 2025; Accepted 28 July 2025  
Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
Available online 31 July 2025 
2199-8531/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Prof JinHyo Joseph Yun. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

2022 ). Nonetheless, systemic risks arising from pandemics, such as 
COVID-19 and conflicts like the war in Ukraine, can disrupt a nation’s 
economy and consequently exert a detrimental impact on the labor 
market ( Golder et al., 2022; Rumaly et al., 2025 ). However, numerous 
industries, including manufacturing, retail, healthcare, finance, and 
transportation, have seen an increase in AI financing ( Rahman et al., 
2024 ). For example, AI in healthcare has fueled improvements in 
tailored medication and diagnostics. In finance, algorithms optimize 
investment methods, while AI-powered robotics improves production 
efficiency in manufacturing ( Rane et al., 2024 ). Global business in -
vestment in artificial intelligence increased 13-fold from US$14.57 
billion in 2013 to US$189 billion in 2023. With 35 % of businesses 
already using AI in their operations, and more than 50 % intend to 
implement AI technologies. Governments, commercial businesses, and 
venture capital firms are the leading investors in the development of AI 
technologies, with the US and China at the forefront of the funding race 
( Rahman et al., 2024 ). Process mining solutions that incorporate large 
language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4, are enabling companies to 
conduct advanced process analytics with enhanced user accessibility 
and streamlined workflows ( Kermani et al., 2024 ). Artificial intelligence 
and machine learning are transforming corporate process management 
and enabling continuous improvement by forecasting and improving 
process metrics using operational data ( Abbasi et al., 2024 ); at the same 
time, businesses are operating more efficiently as a result of AI tech -
nologies like GPT-4, which are improving client experiences and 
streamlining supply chains ( Hlatshwayo, 2023 ).
However, although AI is revolutionizing the industry in many posi -
tive ways, it raises concerns among humans in several areas, and the 
most widespread tension among employees is the fear of job loss. A 
moderate AI-capital-to-labor ratio growth might dramatically change 
economic results by mid-2050, doubling labor underutilization. Besides, 
it might lower disposable income and reduce consumption by 26 % and 
21 %, respectively ( Occhipinti et al., 2024 ). According to Harvard 
Business Review, new automation technologies were expected to dras -
tically disrupt 32 % of employment worldwide and remove 14 % of jobs 
by the next 15–20 years ( Tamayo et al., 2023 ). AI automation is believed 
to be more likely to affect highly skilled individuals, potentially affecting 
analytical non-routine operations, and recent studies have demonstrated 
that over 60 % of high-skilled, non-routine positions are becoming 
increasingly vulnerable to automation ( Ozgul et al., 2024 ).
Despite the swift progression of artificial intelligence and its 
increasing incorporation into diverse sectors, there exists a paucity of 
research about its broader implications for employment and labor 
market dynamics. Many current studies emphasize the technological 
advantages of AI, while fewer investigate its current nature of research 
trends, the potential dangers of job displacement, and the currently 
available mitigation strategies to protect employees’ employment in -
terests. Currently, many developed and emerging countries are leading 
in AI and employment-related research, and the influence of AI on both 
low-skilled and high-skilled occupations is a developing issue that ne -
cessitates further examination beyond conventional employment ideas. 
Given that AI-driven automation is expected to impact labor utilization 
and income distribution profoundly, further research is essential to 
understand these changes.
The significance and novelty of this study stem from its thorough 
examination of the relationship between artificial intelligence and 
employment, thereby filling critical gaps in current research. This paper 
provides a thorough overview of the literature on artificial intelligence 
and unemployment. We review and examine earlier studies that inves -
tigated the effect of AI on the employment sector, intending to deter -
mine a collective understanding of what types of challenges are 
emerging, the most critical jobs that are suspected to be disrupted, and 
the currently available guidelines intended to mitigate these risks. This 
study analyzes the trends and patterns of research on AI and employ -
ment, offering a systematic overview of the evolution of scholarly dis -
cussions. Comprehending these tendencies is essential for recognizing 
knowledge deficiencies and formulating future research priorities. It 
examines the adverse impacts of AI implementation on employment 
trends, emphasizing the concerns linked to automation, workforce 
displacement, and evolving labor requirements. This study is crucial for 
politicians and corporate leaders to foresee workforce difficulties and 
formulate ways to alleviate job losses. It also identifies and assesses 
existing mitigation measures designed to safeguard employees’ job in -
terests, utilizing information from academic sources, national legal 
frameworks, and policies enacted by prominent technology firms. It also 
offers pragmatic recommendations for achieving a balanced and sus -
tainable AI deployment strategy by evaluating these mitigation tech -
niques. Overall, we believe that this study is significant as it provides a 
comprehensive perspective on AI’s influence on employment, enabling 
stakeholders to navigate the changing labor market effectively and 
protect worker interests in the AI-driven economy. In line with these 
purposes, the study is guided by the following three specific objectives: 
1. To examine the trends and patterns of research on AI and 
employment.
2. To identify the detrimental effects of AI use on employment patterns.
3. To review the currently available mitigation guidelines developed by 
countries, academic institutions, and technology firms aimed at 
protecting employees’ job interests.
In this study, we focused on a systematic literature review to un -
derstand the impact of AI on employment. To ensure transparency and 
academic rigor, we used a systematic review protocol and chose the 
PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review protocol and 
Meta-analysis) framework from the list of accessible tools. The PRISMA 
tool was developed by Davis Moher and colleagues in 2009 ( Moher 
et al., 2009 ). In comparison to narrative reviews, which often lack sci -
entific rigor and are susceptible to selection bias, PRISMA ensures sys -
tematic, transparent, and replicable procedures for the selection and 
analysis of studies ( Qureshi et al., 2020 ).
The remainder of the study is as follows. 2 and 3 discuss the existing 
studies with related theories and the methodology of the study, 
respectively. Current research patterns and trends on AI and employ -
ment are discussed in 4 . 5 and 6 discuss the impact of artificial intelli -
gence on employment and summarize the currently available mitigation 
guidelines, respectively. Concluding remarks with policy implications 
are in 7 . Finally, 8 discusses the study’s limitations and future research 
directions.
2. Existing studies and related theories
This section reviews the existing literature and empirical studies 
related to artificial intelligence and unemployment, identifying gaps and 
exploring theories that underpin the topic.
2.1. Existing similar studies
Several studies have been conducted to explore the issue of techno -
logical unemployment in greater depth, particularly in the context of the 
extensive industrial application of artificial intelligence. According to 
them, the field’s research is still in its early stages, and the topic’s overall 
image is more complex than one may imagine ( Dall’Anese, 2024 ; D. 
Ghosh et al., 2025 ; Yeh et al., 2020 ). Berg and Rani (2018) discuss 
working conditions on digital labor platforms, with a particular focus on 
web-based microwork sites, spotlighting the opportunities and chal -
lenges faced by workers on these platforms. Depending on ILO surveys, 
it uncovers challenges such as poor pay, social protection deficits, and 
worker misclassification, provides the guiding principles, and suggests 
initiatives to advance decent work in the online platform economy. In 
another study, Korinek and Stiglitz (2021) argue that if automatic tasks 
through Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), an AI system that can 
perform all tasks that a human can do, progress at a slower rate than 
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
2 

capital accumulation, the wages may rise, while fast automation or 
bounded task complexity may result in a fall in wages before full auto -
mation is achieved. They highlight the danger in the rise of inequality, as 
returns shift toward capital and scarce factors following the advent of 
AGI. Cherif and Gourida (2025) examine the literature on the fourth 
industrial revolution and technological unemployment, with a partic -
ular emphasis on labor market imbalances. Significant patterns are 
revealed by their study, including economic inequality, job polarization, 
and technological unemployment. Additionally, they suggested that 
professions that demand human judgment, creativity, innovation, and 
decision-making are more resilient to technological developments. 
Korinek and Su (2021) concludes that AI and automation have signifi -
cant potential adverse implications for developing countries, as they 
decrease demand for labor and natural resources and undermine their 
comparative advantage. It also focuses on the rapid growth in market 
concentration and inequality powered by technology-fueled superstar 
firms. Similarly, Trammell and Korinek (2023) argue that strong AI 
might create machines that could augment and replicate themselves, 
resulting in very rapid economic expansion. However, because machines 
would handle a significant share of the work, human workers could earn 
far less.
Lima et al. (2021) conducted a comprehensive review of the litera -
ture on technological unemployment to go beyond the ongoing debate 
concerning the extent of automation’s impact. Their objective was to 
gain a deeper understanding of the primary social effects that automa -
tion is likely to engender and to identify the necessary measures to 
address these effects. Their findings provide a comprehensive summary 
of the causes, effects, and potential solutions to technological unem -
ployment identified in the literature. This study identifies technological 
oligopoly, outdated international tax system, skill mismatch, rapid 
technological change, and inadequate tax system as the leading causes of 
technological unemployment. In a separate study, Acemoglu (2024)
argues that AI-induced productivity growth can somewhat increase 
GDP, but it remains insufficient to reduce labor-income inequality; 
instead, it would likely widen the capital-labor income gap. With all 
that, though, AI can exacerbate inequality even when it boosts the 
productivity of low-skill workers, and there are even AI-created tasks 
with negative social value, further complicating its economic impact. 
Additionally, Ghosh et al. (2025) concluded that research on this topic is 
limited to China or parts of developed nations, making it challenging to 
draw broad conclusions. By analyzing the literature, Soulami et al. 
(2024) demonstrate that businesses must put supportive measures in 
place to lessen the possible negative effects of AI on workers’ well-being 
while simultaneously utilizing its advantages to boost workplace au -
tonomy and satisfaction and encourage AI-enabled innovation through 
worker creativity and self-efficacy.
While studies into the impact of AI on employment are increasing, 
much of the relevant literature remains fragmented, regionally focused, 
or relatively narrow, frequently concentrating solely on the economics 
of automation. In this study, we expand on that foundation but do so 
from a different angle by using the latest available research, empha -
sizing sector-by-sector vulnerabilities and scrutinizing current mitiga -
tion recommendations from governments, organizations, and entities. 
Additionally, to put AI’s impact into context, we use case studies to 
illustrate how AI is affecting specific professions and industries. Table 1
provides a summary of the scope, methods, and results of the selected 
studies while emphasizing the advances and limitations of the literature.
2.2. Theoretical background
To explore the current disruptive roles of AI in employment, it is 
essential to understand the underlying theories. There are two main 
channels through which technological developments may create un -
employment: (1) efficiency wage effects theory, and (2) transitional 
phenomenon theory. The concept of efficiency wage effects originates 
from labor economics, where the theory posits that firms may pay 
Table 1 
Synthesizing relevant studies of AI’s impact on employment.
Author Study 
period
Method Finding(s)
Lima et al. (2021) 2000- 
March 
2021
Literature 
Review
The authors generally 
agree that 
technological 
unemployment is a 
probable consequence 
of the current wave of 
automation.
Dall’Anese (2024) 2016–2020 Systematic 
Literature 
Review
The phenomenon of 
unemployment 
induced by 
technological 
advancements is more 
intricate than merely 
automating a job 
through 
programming. It 
involves a complex 
interplay of incentives 
influencing 
individual, corporate, 
and institutional 
behaviors, the 
characteristics of the 
jobs themselves, 
advancements in 
artificial intelligence, 
and the broader 
contextual framework 
within which these 
elements operate.
Yeh et al. (2020) 2016–2019 Systematic 
Literature 
Review
At this point, artificial 
intelligence is still a 
developing 
technology, and 
humans will continue 
to be responsible for 
its advancement. For 
the benefit of human 
society, it depends on 
human intelligence to 
direct the appropriate 
development of AI 
applications.
Cherif and Gourida 
(2025)
2015–2024 Bibliometric 
analysis
Jobs that necessitate 
human judgment, 
creativity, innovation, 
and decision-making 
exhibit resistance to 
technological 
transformation.
Ghosh et al. (2025) 2010–2023 Systematic 
Literature 
Review
The existing literature 
is scattered and 
unable to reach a 
consensus on whether 
AI will result in a 
general loss or 
creation of jobs, 
which sectors or skill 
sets will be most 
impacted, and how 
much these effects 
will vary by region.
Jrad (2023) 2016–2023 Systematic 
Literature 
Review
To maximize AI’s 
beneficial effects on 
economies and 
communities, a 
balance between 
innovation and 
ethical use must be 
struck.
Subaveerapandiyan 
and Shimray (2024)
1984–2024 Bibliometric 
analysis
Highlights the 
growing global 
interest in 
(continued on next page)
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
3 

workers a wage higher than the market wage to increase their produc -
tivity, reduce worker turnover, and attract more skilled workers. How -
ever, as technology advances, companies may be more inclined to invest 
in machines or AI rather than in higher wages for human workers. 
Companies, therefore, introduce technology to either retain or improve 
efficiency, without demanding expensive labor. This decreases the need 
for labor, particularly in low-skilled or routine jobs, which can lead to 
permanent unemployment. Thus, technology diminishes the need for 
expensive labor, so companies replace people with machines, resulting 
in reduced employment opportunities ( Korinek and Stiglitz, 2017 ).
However, technological change does not always create permanent 
unemployment; instead, it can result in job loss in the short to medium 
term as industries transition from old to new skill sets. As new tech -
nology emerges, some industries decline, while others flourish. Workers 
in declining sectors often lose their jobs and may not immediately have 
the skills or opportunities to transition into new sectors. The result is 
that, for a period, job openings are not matched by workers who lose or 
change jobs, resulting in transitional unemployment. So even if tech -
nology does create jobs, people can find themselves out of work 
temporarily while the economy adjusts ( Korinek and Stiglitz, 2017 ).
According to the theory of Creative Destruction ( Schumpeter, 2013 ), 
new and innovative technologies disrupt traditional industries, which 
are then replaced by newer and more innovative technologies. This 
dynamic theory supports long-term economic growth; however, it dis -
rupts those who depend on traditional and old-fashioned technologies. 
Entrepreneurs and industry leaders consistently improve and innovate 
new methods and technologies, implementing them in actions to support 
the growth of the industry and, in a broader sense, the economy, thereby 
paving the way for disrupting existing technologies ( Tülüce and Yurtkur, 
2015 ). Thus, technology-influenced job losses in specific industries may 
not be viewed as permanent job losses, but rather as part of a broader 
process of industrial restructuring that creates new opportunities. The 
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is based on perceived usefulness 
and perceived ease of use, where if a new technology is perceived as 
more useful, easy to use, cost-effective, and faster ( Davis and Grani ´c, 
2024 ), employers may think of replacing specific job roles that were 
played by humans before. Thus, if new technologies need a low level of 
deployment effort and minimum operational changes, employers may 
prefer to automate human skills. Besides, the Unified Theory of Accep -
tance and Use of Technology focuses on four key constructs, namely, 
performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, and facil -
itating conditions ( Xue et al., 2024 ), where employers may adopt new 
technologies if they confirm that employment of new technologies will 
improve companies ’ competitive advantages and have the necessary IT 
infrastructure and expertise to adopt those. Besides, firms may replace 
existing employees when training employees requires enormous time 
and high cost, and they face pressure from peer groups when other in -
dustry leaders adopt automation ( Ayaz and Yanartas ¸ , 2020 ).
3. Materials and methods
A Systematic Literature Review (SLR) is a planned and organized 
way to look at all the research that has been done on a specific subject. 
Collecting, assessing, and combining all applicable studies and research 
results is necessary to address a particular research issue ( Carrera-Rivera 
et al., 2022 ). Additionally, bibliometric analysis is a prevalent and 
rigorous technique for examining and evaluating large amounts of sci -
entific data, facilitating an understanding of the nuances of a particular 
topic ’ s evolution while identifying new directions in that field ( Donthu 
et al., 2021 ). Reviews of pertinent literature are essential as they enable 
scholars to evaluate the state of a given topic ( Linnenluecke et al., 2020 ). 
For this reason, to fulfill research objective 1) to understand the nature 
and current research trends of AI and its adverse impact on employment, 
we use a bibliometric analysis; besides, for research objective 2), we use 
the SLR technique with the PRISMA framework to explore the challenges 
introduced by AI on the employment sector. We use PRISMA, as it im -
proves the study ’ s reliability and validity by ensuring a thorough and 
organized approach to the literature review ( Qureshi et al., 2020; Shu 
et al., 2019 ). Additionally, it reduces selection bias by requiring re -
searchers to establish eligibility criteria beforehand and record each 
stage of the review process, including the search strategy, screening, and 
final inclusion ( Xiao and Watson, 2019 ). The new PRISMA 2020 
guidelines include enhanced requirements for data reporting, risk of bias 
assessment, and visual flow diagrams, which significantly enhance the 
quality of reviews ( Page et al., 2021 ). However, as this investigation 
aims to understand the adverse impact of AI on employment sectors, we 
examine previous studies regarding the intricate connection between 
jobs and artificial intelligence. In this regard, to maintain the quality of 
our research, we used the Scopus database, which is considered one of 
the best database sources available in the current academic world. 
Moreover, exploring the research objective 3) current mitigation 
guidelines for the adverse effects of AI on employment, we use the 
narrative literature technique as the mitigation guidelines are developed 
by different authorities of the respective countries, academic in -
stitutions, and tech-giants companies, and generally, these guidelines 
are not any journal articles but are in the form of the report and are 
stored in the repository on the respective authorities with public 
accessibility, and as a result, are not indexed in any database. So, we 
manually search for those relevant reports and review them to under -
stand the current mitigation guidelines for the adverse impact of AI on 
employment.
We employed the following search terms in the advanced search 
option of the Scopus database to carry out our study: ((AI OR "Artificial 
Intelligence") AND (Unemployment)). As this study aims to understand 
whether the applications of AI are responsible for accelerating unem -
ployment, we used the keywords unemployment with artificial intelli -
gence. Generally, it is believed that the applications of AI in job sectors 
and related fields have been rising since 2015. Thus, to understand 
current viewpoints on the nexus between artificial intelligence and job 
trends, a thorough literature search covering the years 2015 – July 9, 
2025, was undertaken. Here, 641 different types of documents, 
including book chapters, editorials, reviews, research articles, and 
others, were found in the first comprehensive search. As our study is 
related to employment or job sectors, it is generally associated with 
social science issues and business fields; thus, we focused on these sec -
tors. So, we were restricted to concentrating only on our research ob -
jectives, and publications outside of journals and subjects other than the 
social sciences, business, management, and accounting, economics, 
Table 1 ( continued )
Author Study 
period 
Method Finding(s)
comprehending and 
reducing the effects of 
job displacement 
caused by AI.
Soulami et al. (2024) 2015 – 2024 Bibliometric 
and 
Systematic 
review
Existing research 
highlights how crucial 
it is for businesses to 
put supportive 
measures in place to 
lessen the possible 
negative effects of AI 
on workers ’ well- 
being while 
simultaneously 
utilizing its 
advantages to boost 
workplace autonomy 
and satisfaction and 
encourage AI-enabled 
innovation through 
worker creativity and 
self-efficacy.
Source: Authors ’ developed.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
4 

econometrics, finance, and publications in the press were excluded. 
After a comprehensive screening process, 222 documents were selected 
for additional analysis based on a methodical application of inclusion 
and exclusion criteria. To preserve linguistic consistency, 29 non- 
English documents were also removed from the analysis. To make the 
next steps of the review process more manageable, the data that was 
finally kept, excluding the unnecessary documents, was carefully ar -
ranged in an Excel file, and ultimately, a database of 130 articles was 
selected. All the criteria for collecting data are summarized in Table 2 , 
whereas Fig. 1 provides a quick overview of the entire PRISMA 
technique.
4. Current status of research trends of AI and its adverse impact 
on employment
To understand the current publication nature and status of AI’s 
adverse impact on the employment sector, we use bibliometric analysis, 
which shows the publication trend of the adverse effects of AI on the 
employment sector over time, top-cited journals, and most active 
countries. Besides, we use content analysis presenting Bradford’s law to 
identify the core journals or sources in determining AI’s adverse impact 
on the human employment field of research, top collaborating countries, 
thematic mapping, and a tree map to visually represent data in a hier -
archical structure on AI’s adverse effect on the employment sector. 
Finally, specific themes have been identified to understand the ongoing 
nature of AI’s detrimental impact on human employment sectors.
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of research perspectives on AI’s impact 
on employment. To generate the data presented in Fig. 2, a total of 130 
papers were examined, and we ultimately selected them using various 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, categorizing them according to the 
perspectives they reported on the influence of AI on employment. The 
abstracts, findings, and conclusion sections of all 130 articles were 
reviewed meticulously to understand the overall employment-focused 
narrative. Then, we code manually through qualitative content anal -
ysis, applying the following criteria: (i) positive: articles that emphasize 
the positive potential of AI in promoting job creation, enhancing worker 
productivity, or complementing human labor, (ii) negative: articles that 
discuss AI as a threat to human employment, including job displace -
ment, automation, or fear of technological unemployment, and (iii) 
mixed: articles that include both positive and negative employment 
implications—recognizing AI may displace work but may also create 
new work, or modify existing work. Out of the total 130 documents, 
29 % of the publications were classified as portraying a positive impact, 
62 % showed an adverse effect, and 9 % had a mixed perspective. Thus, 
according to our database, to date, most research acknowledges that AI 
poses a threat to human employment rather than being complementary 
to it, and the perception of a rising risk of technological unemployment 
is diffusing in the literature.
4.1. Publications over time
The total number of academic publications on artificial intelligence 
and its negative impact on employment from 2015 to July 2025 is dis -
played in Fig. 3 , suggesting that the first publication on our chosen topic 
was released in 2015. Things improved over the ensuing years. As we 
limited our study to July 09, 2025, the number of articles published in 
2025 is 27. However, by the end of 2025, we can expect the number of 
publications to increase beyond the current count. When the COVID-19 
epidemic started in 2019, articles discussing AI’s adverse impact on 
employment noted a significant surge. Due to the widespread quaran -
tines imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic, artificial intelligence and 
robotics have become more prevalent tools for carrying out formerly 
human-only jobs ( Xu et al., 2022 ). The increasing tendency, particularly 
in the last few years, suggests that this field of study is gaining scholarly 
attention. The majority of the articles, approximately 79 % (103/130), 
were published within the last five years (2021–2025), with 36 % 
(47/130) appearing over the previous three years (2021–2023). How -
ever, the number of studies on AI and unemployment has fluctuated over 
time. Although research and academic interest in AI and its adverse 
impact on employment have expanded significantly over the last six 
years, in 2020, core research on AI and its adverse impact on employ -
ment decreased, likely due to post-pandemic research diversification. 
Thus, after a considerable pick in pandemic years from 2020 to 2022, 
researchers might have diversified their core research interest in AI and 
shifted their focus from "core AI and employment challenges" to "AI and 
ethics," "generative AI," "AI in healthcare and education," and slightly 
reducing publication volumes in this specific niche.
4.2. Top potential journals
Table 3 presents the distribution of research in various reputable 
journals, along with their citations, offering valuable insights into the 
development of the AI-unemployment research domain. Identifying the 
most influential journals not only helps future researchers determine the 
destination of their future work but also enables them to understand 
where academic conversations are continuing and which prospective 
sources (journals) have the most influential power to advance their 
identified knowledge. Besides, understanding citation patterns and the 
average number of citations per article provides insight into the venues 
where the authors’ impactful research is gaining recognition. This 
analysis underscores the academic significance of the topic by demon -
strating that a wide range of reputable publications regularly publish 
articles on AI and unemployment, indicating that the topic is not merely 
a specialized interest but rather a growing field of study with interna -
tional scholarly interest.
According to the literature review on AI unemployment, 130 papers 
have been published in 109 different sources. The top 10 most prolific 
journals have contributed 13 publications, or roughly 10 % of the entire 
research output. With 157 citations in a single publication, the Academy 
of Management Perspectives tops the field in citations, demonstrating its 
substantial intellectual influence. MDPI’s Administrative Sciences comes 
next with one publication and 127 citations, indicating its applicability 
to AI research that is focused on the future. African Journal of Law and 
Justice System, published by Adonis & Abbey Publishers, focuses on 
discussions of AI-driven economic shifts and has one article with 90 
citations. The African Renaissance has one publication and 84 citations, 
demonstrating scholarly interest in changes in the labor market brought 
on by AI. American Economist from SAGE publications and Applied Eco -
nomics, published by Taylor and Francis, have almost a similar number 
of citations (63 and 61, respectively), highlighting AI’s ethical and so -
cietal implications. AI’s effects on income are discussed in Basic Income 
Studies (De Gruyter. Although it has the most publications (three) out of 
the top ten, Bmc Medical Education, a Springer Nature journal, has 48 
citations, suggesting a more extensive but marginally under-cited dis -
cussion of AI’s societal ramifications. These publications span multiple 
Table 2 
Data gathering criteria.
Keywords 
search
(((ai OR "Artificial Intelligence") AND (unemployment))) AND 
(LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2015) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2016) OR 
LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2017) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2018) OR 
LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2019) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2020) OR 
LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2021) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2022) OR 
LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2023) OR LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2024)) OR 
LIMIT-TO (PUBYEAR, 2025)) AND (LIMIT-TO (SUBJAREA, 
"SOCI") OR LIMIT-TO (SUBJAREA, "BUSI") OR LIMIT-TO 
(SUBJAREA, "ECON")) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, "ar")) AND 
(LIMIT-TO (PUBSTAGE, "final")) AND (LIMIT-TO (SRCTYPE, "j")) 
AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, "English"))
Time span 2015- July 09, 2025
Database Scopus
Language English
Subjects Social sciences, Business, Management and Accounting, 
Economics, Econometrics Finance
Source: Authors’ developed.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
5 

academic fields, including management, technology, ethics, economics, 
and the social sciences, reflecting the widespread interest in how AI may 
impact work.
4.3. Top potential countries
Fig. 4 displays the geographical hit map, which shows the number of 
academic publications on AI and unemployment produced by country. 
The map illustrates significant diversity in the number of publications 
across different countries. To develop this map, we categorized and 
rated nations based on the number of publications they have produced 
over the last decade. Concerning geographical production by continent, 
it is observed that Asia is the leader, followed by North America. 
However, the most productive country is China, with 47 publications, 
followed by the USA (33 publications), Germany (16 publications), India 
(15 publications), Italy (13 publications), and Turkey (12 publications). 
Moreover, the contributions of other countries to artificial intelligence 
and their detrimental impact on employment did not exceed twelve.
4.4. Corresponding authorship analysis
The involvement of researchers from multiple countries in a study 
indicates a high degree of cooperation, which can help maximize results 
and strengthen the validity of their findings by leveraging the resources 
and expertise of participants from other countries. Furthermore, it il -
lustrates the potential for future collaboration and research opportu -
nities in an area with many co-authors. However, Fig. 5 shows the 
countries of the corresponding authors, indicating that most articles 
were produced individually rather than collaboratively across multiple 
countries. The results show that the USA, China, India, Italy, Australia, 
France, Germany, Azerbaijan, Canada, and Spain collaborated with 
Fig. 1. PRISMA 2020 flow diagram. Source: Authors ’ developed.
Fig. 2. Distribution of research perspectives on AI ’ s impact on employment. 
Source: Authors ’ computation based on Scopus data.
Fig. 3. Publication trends in the AI-Unemployment research domain. Source: 
Authors ’ computation based on Scopus data.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
6 

other countries, where China and Germany had the highest number of 
multiple-country publications with two documents, and the rest of the 
countries collaborating nations published only one document. However, 
the United Kingdom, South Africa, Japan, Brazil, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, and Turkey have only one document pro -
duced domestically.
4.5. Core source analysis
Bradford ’ s Law typically describes the distribution of articles among 
journals. It postulates that, for any given topic, a small number of 
journals will have the most relevant articles, while a bigger group of 
journals will have fewer, and an even larger group will have even fewer. 
Information retrieval and collection management can benefit from the 
Law ’ s insight into the dispersion of literature across many sources ( Lada 
et al., 2023 ). According to their output level, a journal classification 
based on Bradford ’ s law is depicted in Fig. 6 , where journals are cate -
gorized into three groups (e.g., core zone, middle zone, and minor zone). 
Cluster 1, referred to as the core zone (zone 1), comprises 32 % of the 
articles, with 42 articles from 22 sources (journals). Cluster 2, the 
middle zone (zone 2), has articles with 45 sources (journals). The middle 
zone consists of 35 % of the articles. Lastly, Cluster 3, referred to as the 
minor zone, comprises 21 articles with 33 % from 21 sources (journals).
4.6. Treemap analysis
Treemap is a type of graphical data representation tool where a tree 
diagram ’ s nodes are represented as stacked rectangles. They are 
composed of several identically sized rectangles stacked on top of one 
another. A large rectangle represents a data tree branch, and the sizes of 
each node inside that branch are represented by smaller rectangles ( Lada 
et al., 2023 ). Fig. 7 displays a treemap of the top 20 terms using the 
author ’ s keywords. Treemap data indicates that the most significant 
percentage is 25 % for "artificial intelligence," followed by "unemploy -
ment" (14 %), "technological development" (10 %), "innovation" (7 %), 
“ automation ” (6 %). The word "income distributions ” was 5 %. Besides, 
the words "robotics," "risk assessment", and "machine learning" were 4 % 
in frequency, while the contributions from other keywords were pretty 
modest, ranging from 1 % to 3 %. The figure suggests that "artificial 
intelligence" and "unemployment" are the dominant themes, primarily 
due to the rise of technology, with other topics, such as "automation" and 
Table 3 
Most prolific sources in the AI-Unemployment domain.
Rank Journal Publications Citations ACPA Publisher
1 Academy of 
Management 
Perspectives
1 157 157 Academy of 
Management
2 Administrative 
Sciences
1 127 127 MDPI
3 African Journal 
of Law and 
Justice System
1 90 90 Adonis & 
Abbey 
Publishers
4 African 
Renaissance
1 84 84 Adonis & 
Abbey 
Publishers
5 American 
Economist
1 63 63 SAGE 
Publications
6 Applied 
Economics
1 61 61 Taylor & 
Francis
7 Asian Bioethics 
Review
1 56 56 Springer 
Nature
8 Basic Income 
Studies
2 51 25.5 De Gruyter
9 Bmc Medical 
Education
3 48 16 Springer 
Nature
10 Brics Law 
Journal
1 46 46 Publishing 
House V.Ema
Note: ACPA = Average citations per article. Source: Authors ’ compilation
Fig. 4. Potential countries all over the world. Source: Authors developed from 
Scopus data.
Fig. 5. Countries of corresponding authors. Note: SCP = Single country publications, MCP = Multiple country publications. Source: Authors developed based on 
Scopus data.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
7 

"income distribution", playing minor but notable roles.
4.7. Thematic analysis
4.7.1. Thematic mapping
While scientific visualization focuses on exploring unknown infor -
mation and typically requires more user effort, thematic mapping 
emphasizes communicating known information to a broad audience 
using perceptible pictures ( Ding and Meng, 2014 ). The map can be used 
to depict each cluster, with various colors denoting various subjects 
( Cobo et al., 2011 ). The significance of the research area is reflected by 
callon centrality, while theme development is measured by callon den -
sity ( Callon et al., 1991 ). The top right section of Fig. 8 contains motor 
themes, the bottom left contains an emerging or declining theme, the 
Fig. 6. Bradford ’ s Law. Source: Authors developed based on Scopus data.
Fig. 7. Treemap using author ’ s keywords. Source: Authors developed based on Scopus data.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
8 

lower right contains a basic theme, and the upper left contains a highly 
developed and isolated theme. In Motor themes (Q1), topics like "ma -
chine learning", "information and communication technology", "occu -
pation", "economic development", "future of works", and "labor 
relations" have high centrality and density, indicating that they are 
prominent and central to the research on “ AI and Unemployment ” . 
Additionally, niche theme (Q2) indicates "chatgpt", "data mining", and 
"internet" are well-developed but distinct subjects that have not yet been 
fully incorporated into the study ’ s overall discussion. Topics like "sus -
tainability", "entrepreneurs", "ethics", "decision makings", "personnel", 
"labor market", and "skilled labor" are in the emerging or decreasing 
quadrant (Q3), meaning that more research is necessary to comprehend 
their relevance fully. In contrast, "artificial intelligence", "unemploy -
ment", and "technological development" fall somewhere in the middle of 
the basic themes quadrant (Q4) and the motor themes (Q1), indicating 
their fundamental significance to the field and offering room for further 
Fig. 8. Thematic mapping. Source: Authors developed based on Scopus data.
Fig. 9. Co-occurrence of keywords. Source: Authors developed based on Scopus data.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
9 

theoretical and empirical advancement. Scholars and policymakers can 
use this thematic mapping as an organized method to pinpoint research 
gaps, priority areas, and fresh avenues for AI and Unemployment studies 
in the future.
4.7.2. Co-occurrence Analysis
Co-word analysis is a tool that uses terms from the published liter -
ature to build connections and thematic frameworks around specific 
subjects ( Callon et al., 1983 ). The strategy assumes that a high frequency 
of certain words in a text suggests a strong association between the ideas 
those keywords represent. With co-word analysis, a network of themes 
and relations is created to illustrate the conceptual space of a field. The 
co-occurrence of phrases across a subset of articles on AI and its adverse 
impact on employment was examined and presented in Fig. 9 . However, 
several of the words were determined to be unrelated to the current 
investigation, and thus, those were taken out of the term analysis, and 19 
terms ’ co-occurrence was finally examined. The node ’ s size shows the 
frequency of use of the term; larger nodes signify a higher frequency of 
use ( Jain et al., 2023 ). The line thickness that connects two terms in -
dicates the strength of their correlation. Based on the findings of the 
co-occurrences study, the terms "artificial intelligence," "technological 
unemployment," "innovation," and "automation" were all given larger 
nodes on the map ( Fig. 9 ), and these are some of the most commonly 
used words and phrases in AI ’ s impact on the employment field. The 
degree to which keywords cluster together is seen as a measure of how 
frequently they convey related concepts. In this study, we identify six 
clusters, and the total number of elements in each cluster is shown in 
Table 4 .
Six groups/clusters were determined based on the network. The idea 
behind clustering is that terms within a comparable cluster correspond 
to the same research themes. In this study, we identified the following 
three themes.
4.7.3. Cluster 1: Industrial transitions due to innovation and its effects 
(Red)
The innovation of AI and related technological development has led 
to a technological revolution that has transformed human lives and 
processes, enabling goods and services to compete effectively in today ’ s 
markets. AI opens up possibilities for business and career exploration, 
including assessing risk and investigating new global market opportu -
nities ( Thamik and Wu, 2022 ). Techno-optimists even called it the 
"second machine age," claiming that the human brain is now being 
replaced ( Boavida and Candeias, 2021 ); however, the primary concern 
is how we can develop a sustainable and innovative ecosystem. Since the 
start of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, technology has taken center 
stage in the capitalist system. The significance of technology in the 
manufacturing process has been acknowledged by nearly every school of 
economic thinking. According to classical economics, technology is a 
means of boosting economic output, which in turn creates more jobs. 
However, new research indicates that labor will suffer as technology 
advances ( Gera and Singh, 2019 ). Tax laws could be utilized to reduce 
technological unemployment without making it more difficult for 4th IR 
advances to be adopted ( Goldsmith and Casey, 2024 ). AI and income 
distribution have long been seen as having a detrimental relationship. 
Automation is leading to a decline in low- and medium-skilled occupa -
tions, an increase in unemployment, and a widening of the pay gap 
between middle- and high-skilled workers ( Goyal and Aneja, 2020 ).
4.7.4. Cluster 2: Changes in labor market and technological unemployment 
(Green)
Digitalization and artificial intelligence have emerged as the primary 
engines behind a dramatic shift in industries, drastically altering the 
nature of labor and employment relations, thereby creating productivity 
growth. The advent of Industry 4.0, marked by the fusion of digital and 
artificial intelligence ( Egana-delSol et al., 2022 ), is a prime example of 
this change and offers the labor force both opportunities and challenges. 
However, as automation powered by AI replaces human labor in jobs 
across industries, leading to unemployment and income inequality, 
worries about technological unemployment loom large ( Fossen and 
Sorgner, 2022; Garcia-Murillo and MacInnes, 2019 ) and raises issues 
regarding the future allocation of work and the security of income. The 
adoption of digital and artificial intelligence impacts wages, and the 
ongoing automation wave sparks discussions on the future of work, as 
stakeholders struggle to manage this changing environment and ensure 
equitable growth. Upskilling and adaptability are vital for individuals 
and businesses to thrive in an increasingly AI-driven economy.
4.7.5. Cluster 3: Artificial intelligence in medical education (Blue)
Technology is continually developing and being applied in nearly 
every area of society, including sustainability, nutrition, and health 
( Dancausa Mill ´an and Mill ´an V ´azquez de la Torre, 2024 ). Artificial In -
telligence (AI) has the potential to simplify complicated processes and 
boost productivity in medical education. The majority of medical stu -
dents viewed artificial intelligence as an assistive technology that could 
reduce errors (70.5 %), facilitate doctors ’ access to information 
(85.8 %), and improve patients ’ access to healthcare (76.7 %) ( Civaner 
et al., 2022 ). Another cutting-edge AI language model, ChatGPT, has 
garnered significant interest globally, sparking both interest and con -
troversy. However, determining its societal impact and resolving any 
potential issues requires an understanding of the general public ’ s per -
ceptions of its utility ( Lima et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2025 ). While AI has 
enormous potential benefits for humans, especially in the healthcare 
industry where it can help with surgeries, disease treatment, record 
keeping, and improving the lives of both patients and doctors, its misuse 
can have adverse effects such as biasness, unemployment, privacy vio -
lations, and a lack of accountability, to mention a few ( Arawi et al., 
2024 ).
4.7.6. Cluster 4: Machine learning and digitalization of the economy 
(Yellow)
Machine learning, big data analytics, blockchain technology, artifi -
cial intelligence, robotics, additive manufacturing, cloud computing, the 
Internet of Things, and many more technologies are emerging all over 
the world ( Bhattacharyya and Nair, 2019 ). Job responsibilities are 
shifting, and skill requirements are evolving rapidly as machine learning 
algorithms become more prevalent across multiple industries (M. M. Ali, 
2020 ; Goyal and Aneja, 2020 ). The future of work is greatly impacted by 
digitalization, artificial intelligence, and other new technologies since 
they create new positions that require new abilities, and most senior 
employees may likely struggle greatly with these changes and diffi -
culties ( Stojanova et al., 2019 ).
4.7.7. Cluster 5: Future of work in the automation era (Purple)
Automation is changing employment norms, reinventing job 
Table 4 
Clusters of keywords.
Clusters Number of 
Keywords
Keywords
Cluster 
1
6 Income distribution, industrial revolution, 
innovation, risk assessment, sustainability, 
technological development
Cluster 
2
4 Inequality, labor market, productivity growth, 
technological unemployment
Cluster 
3
3 Artificial intelligence, ChatGPT, medical education
Cluster 
4
2 Digital economy, machine learning
Cluster 
5
2 Automation, future of work
Cluster 
6
2 Robotics, technology
Source: Authors developed
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
10 

responsibilities, and transforming entire industries. This shift is being 
driven by continuous technological advancement, especially in the area 
of automation, which has the potential to stimulate efficiency and 
innovation in several industries ( Boavida and Candeias, 2021 ). Auto -
mation is rendered possible by robotics technology, which streamlines 
workflows and enhances human capabilities in the workplace. It reduces 
labor costs, but it also displaces workers in more established areas 
( Guliyev, 2023 ). The workforce must adapt to new skill needs and 
organizational structures as the integration of robotics and automation 
technology significantly transforms work settings. The future workforce 
will have to deal with the challenges of automation while utilizing 
technical breakthroughs to stimulate economic growth and innovation 
( Chomanski, 2019; Goethals and Ziegelmayer, 2021; Jones, 2023 ).
4.7.8. Cluster 6: Industry transformation and the role of robotics (Blue)
Robotics technology optimizes operations, enhances safety, and en -
ables flexible industrial processes — from autonomous drones in logistics 
to collaborative robots on factory floors. Human-machine cooperation is 
becoming more common, and AI-powered robotics innovations are 
improving efficiency and production. Businesses may better respond to 
shifting consumer needs and seize chances for expansion and innovation 
by embracing robotics ( Borsato and Lorentz, 2023 ). However, worries 
regarding job displacement and the restructuring of labor markets are 
raised by the broad adoption of robotics and technology ( Ernst et al., 
2019; Heinrich and Witko, 2021; McGaughey and Research, 2018 ). To 
remain competitive in a rapidly changing market, the workforce of the 
future will need to adapt to these shifts by leveraging robotics and 
artificial intelligence technologies. The ability to adapt, innovate, and 
have a lifelong learning philosophy will be essential for navigating the 
complexity of the future workplace and realizing the revolutionary po -
tential of robotics and artificial intelligence.
5. Artificial intelligence and its adverse impact on employment
In the 21st century, artificial intelligence, along with its many 
prospects for business, is creating challenges for society and disrupting 
the traditional employment sectors, and as a result, many adverse im -
pacts of artificial intelligence on human employment are evident now; 
also, many traditional job sectors are facing disruption because of arti -
ficial intelligence adoption. This section discusses the key challenges 
that AI creates in employment and highlights some traditional pro -
fessions that are vulnerable to AI adoption. Side by side, we provide 
some real-life examples of the challenges AI is creating in the employ -
ment sector. To identify the risks created by AI adoption and the pro -
fessions suspected of being negatively affected, we utilize scholarly 
articles identified by the PRISMA framework, adopting different inclu -
sion and exclusion criteria. Additionally, we utilize various newspapers, 
magazines, blogs, and other relevant sources to provide real-life exam -
ples (real stories) of the negative consequences of adopting artificial 
intelligence on human employment.
5.1. Key challenges of AI-driven workforce transformation
With the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence, the nature of 
current employment is undergoing disruption and transformation in 
several ways. Fig. 10 presents the conceptual framework, illustrating the 
adverse impact of AI on employment, which aligns with related theories 
on how AI has transformative effects on the future of work.
5.1.1. Automating routine tasks
Numerous repetitive and routine operations have been automated by 
AI-driven technology, displacing human workers in sectors such as 
customer service, manufacturing, and administration ( Mutascu, 2021 ). 
Shen and Zhang (2024) claim that AI increases labor productivity by 
automating monotonous jobs so workers can concentrate on more 
valuable endeavors. For example, robotic process automation (RPA) 
dramatically reduces the need for human intervention in data processing 
and back-office processes. Although this increases productivity and 
lowers operating expenses, workers in low-skilled, low-paid jobs are 
particularly affected ( Goyal and Aneja, 2020 ). These individuals often 
struggle to find alternative employment after the shift because there is 
less demand for their traditional skills due to this technology-related job 
transformation. Even if these technologies streamline processes, they 
risk creating an employment gap in which displaced workers struggle to 
transition into positions that require more advanced skills. The 
displacement of low-skilled labor due to automation creates a temporal 
Fig. 10. Conceptual framework and adverse effects of AI on the future of work. Source: Authors developed.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
11 

mismatch between the supply and demand for the labor force, aligning 
with the transition phenomenon ( Korinek and Stiglitz, 2017 ), where 
economies experience near- and medium-term disruptions as labor 
markets refocus in response to technological change.
5.1.2. Declining demand for specific competencies
Traditional jobs needing repetitive or manual skills are becoming less 
common as the use of AI is rising ( Frank et al., 2019 ). Occupations like 
routine analysts, telemarketers, and accounting clerks are especially 
susceptible to being replaced by AI ( Loong et al., 2022 ). These days, 
people are seeking highly developed technical skills, creativity, and 
problem-solving abilities that are difficult for AI to replicate. This 
change disproportionately impacts older workers or members of 
marginalized communities because they might not have access to op -
portunities for upskilling. Furthermore, lower-skilled workers 
frequently experience stagnation or are compelled to move into less 
stable industries, whereas high-education jobs remain secure 
( Morandini et al., 2023 ). The Technology Acceptance Model elucidates 
that employees who find it challenging to embrace or adapt to new 
technologies, particularly older or marginalized individuals, are at a 
greater risk of lagging in the advancing labor market ( Davis and Grani ´c, 
2024 ).
5.1.3. Polarization of the workplace
The labor market is becoming more divided due to AI-driven auto -
mation, which has resulted in a decline in mid-skill positions and an 
increase in high-skill occupations needing specialized knowledge and 
low-skill jobs in manual or service industries ( Mutascu, 2021 ). This di -
vision occurs when middle-class workers lose their jobs to machines and 
frequently take up lower-paying positions ( Li, 2023 ). In addition to 
impacting individual workers, this polarization exacerbates economic 
inequality and marginalizes vulnerable groups. For instance, although 
the need for data scientists and machine learning specialists is growing, 
clerical and assembly-line workers are being replaced. Polarization is a 
sign of transition, and possibly a result of a skills shortage. High-ability 
workers may receive efficient wages to attract scarce talent, and 
low-ability workers are made redundant. Meanwhile, this pattern is 
symptomatic of a transition in which middle-skill jobs are eliminated by 
automation, and the labor structures are reconfigured ( Korinek and 
Stiglitz, 2017 ).
5.1.4. Technological unemployment
When human work is replaced by automation powered by AI in 
critical industries, the phenomenon known as technological unemploy -
ment takes place ( Guliyev, 2023 ). Autonomous cars, for instance, have 
the potential to disrupt the transportation sector by displacing millions 
of truck and taxi drivers. Retail employees must also deal with or face 
AI-powered customer support bots and automated inventory systems. 
Research from MIT indicates that the quick adoption of AI causes a lag in 
workforce adaptation, depriving many workers of the time and re -
sources they need to shift ( Sheffi, 2024 ). Technological unemployment 
can be linked to the creative destruction theory ( Schumpeter, 2013; 
Tülüce and Yurtkur, 2015 ), where AI can disrupt outdated roles, and 
innovation creates new opportunities. However, governments are 
responsible for implementing workforce transition strategies, such as 
subsidized training programs, to lessen these effects. Another suggested 
remedy might be universal basic income (UBI), which aims to offer 
financial stability as workers adjust to changes brought forth by AI 
( Shah, 2024 ).
5.1.5. Effect on freelance and gig work
AI has changed the gig economy by increasing productivity on sites 
like Upwork and Uber ( Papandreou, 2024 ). However, transparency and 
worker autonomy are frequently diminished when gig worker evalua -
tion procedures are automated, such as through AI-driven ratings and 
matching algorithms ( Hu et al., 2024 ). The Stanford Social Innovation 
Review explores how AI ’ s ability to decide gig workers ’ compensation 
and workload distribution may lead to unfair treatment and exacerbate 
job insecurity ( Rangwala, 2024 ). Creative freelancers face difficulties as 
generative AI tools take over jobs like graphic design, content authoring, 
and video editing ( Bellini, 2024 ). Generally, older or less tech-savvy 
freelancers may face difficulties in understanding or adopting AI tools 
or similar platforms. It can be linked to the Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology ( Ayaz and Yanartas ¸ , 2020; Xue et al., 2024 ), 
where this situation may lead to a decrease in employees ’ acceptance of 
modern technologies, and employers may find it more convenient to 
adopt technology. Not knowing how to use the ratings or job-matching 
algorithms can be stressful for many gig workers. However, regulations 
that protect salaries, guarantee equitable treatment, and offer benefits to 
gig workers are necessary in light of these disruptions ( Tan et al., 2021 ). 
Without such protection, the gig economy risks becoming a platform 
where unregulated AI tools are exploited.
5.1.6. Extending skill gaps and inequality
AI ’ s quick development has increased the skills gap and left many 
people unprepared for the demands of the new technology ( Case, 2024 ). 
Although AI enhances decision-making in industries such as healthcare 
and finance, these developments are not accessible to individuals who 
lack technological competence ( Shin et al., 2023 ). Due to the unequal 
playing field created by this discrepancy, career advancement and job 
stability are determined by access to education and training. Infra -
structure constraints make it difficult for workers in developing econo -
mies to prepare for AI-driven jobs ( Loong et al., 2022 ). The skill gap also 
implies that firms are willing to pay higher wages (efficiency wages) to 
attract the best workers, further deepening inequality. At the same time, 
the widening gap between skilled and unskilled workers indicates a 
delay in the education and training systems needed to respond to 
technological changes needs. This trend illustrates how only those with 
the right skills can benefit from the advances in AI. Employers 
commonly pay higher-than-market wages for skilled labor (the effi -
ciency wage effect), and the rest lag behind, suggesting a transitional lag 
where workers educate themselves after the fact of technological change 
( Korinek and Stiglitz, 2017 ).
5.2. Professions most vulnerable to AI disruption
Artificial intelligence has revolutionized industries worldwide, 
causing significant disruption in several areas. Although AI can enhance 
human abilities, it also poses a threat to employment, particularly in 
white-collar occupations. It is essential to understand how AI impacts 
various industries to predict the nature of work in the future and develop 
workforce adaptation plans. Fig. 11 illustrates how AI can negatively 
impact various traditional professions.
5.2.1. AI in white-collar jobs
Office-based white-collar employment, like managerial, profes -
sional, and administrative roles, is becoming more and more susceptible 
to automation ( Goyal and Aneja, 2020 ). Automating repetitive pro -
cesses, such as data entry, scheduling, and analysis, can be achieved 
with AI technologies like machine learning and natural language pro -
cessing. For example, by processing financial transactions faster and 
more effectively than humans, AI-driven computers can help with ac -
counting and auditing, endangering the jobs that accountants have 
historically performed ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014 ). Furthermore, 
ROSS Intelligence, an AI-driven legal research tool, has replaced the 
requirement for human lawyers to do basic legal research, demon -
strating how AI has permeated the legal profession. Moreover, the 
financial industry ’ s need for human analysts is declining due to AI ’ s 
application in algorithmic trading and fraud detection ( Schrieberg, 
2024 ).
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
12 

5.2.2. AI in the automation of healthcare
One of the sectors with the most potential for AI advancement is the 
healthcare sector. The ability of AI to handle some administrative and 
diagnostic duties raises concerns about job displacement, even while it 
has the potential to improve patient care. In medical imaging, AI algo -
rithms are already being utilized to identify diseases like cancer accu -
rately. The need for radiologists may be decreased since these 
technologies can evaluate X-rays, MRIs, and CT scans far more quickly 
than human radiologists ( Esteva et al., 2017 ). Furthermore, AI-powered 
tools such as virtual health assistants and robotic surgery increasingly 
support or replace human physicians in specific tasks. AI-powered 
scheduling and patient data management also lessen the demand for 
administrative healthcare positions ( Lee and Yoon, 2021 ). Thus, it is 
anticipated to automate repetitive, routine work in the healthcare in -
dustry, which could reduce the need for some clinical and support staff.
5.2.3. AI in the field of education
Professionals in education are both excited and concerned about AI ’ s 
ability to transform the educational system. AI is being utilized to create 
intelligent tutoring systems, automate grading, and customize learning 
experiences. AI educational technology can offer individualized in -
struction and tests that instantly adjust to each student ’ s needs 
( Heffernan and Heffernan, 2014 ). The demand for administrative staff is 
declining due to the automation of administrative processes, such as 
scheduling, student registration, and grade processing. Additionally, 
chatbots and AI-powered virtual instructors are being used to help stu -
dents with their assignments, which could reduce the need for human 
teachers in some subject areas ( Polyportis and Pahos, 2025 ). Thus, using 
AI in education raises questions about the future of teaching jobs, even 
though it can improve learning outcomes. Less experienced teachers or 
those whose jobs involve monotonous, repetitive work rather than 
encouraging creativity or critical thinking are at a higher risk.
5.2.4. AI in the press and media industry
AI has already had a significant impact on the media and press in -
dustries ( Kochetova, 2023 ). In fields such as finance, sports, and 
weather, where automated systems can quickly process data and 
generate reports, algorithms are now used to produce news ( Graefe, 
2016 ). Personalized content distribution is another application of AI 
that makes recommendations for articles, videos, and ads depending on 
user behavior. Although AI tools can boost media efficiency and help 
journalists create content, the automation of content generation and 
curation is raising concerns about job losses in traditional journalism 
professions. However, for narrative and in-depth analysis, investigative 
journalism and creative writing may still rely on human knowledge 
( Napoli, 2014 ). Thus, due to AI ’ s capacity to automate news production, 
entry-level positions in the media industry, such as copywriting and 
editing, are particularly at risk, and the need for human journalists may 
decline.
5.2.5. AI in the creative sector
AI has an impact on a variety of creative industries, including 
advertising, design, music, and film. AI tools are being used for script -
writing, visual design, and music production. AI systems, for instance, 
can help with video editing and creating realistic artwork, saving time 
and human labor needed to develop creative material ( Elgammal et al., 
2017 ). AI music generators, such as OpenAI ’ s MuseNet, are challenged 
by traditional music production ideas, which can create songs in various 
styles and genres. Besides, there is a growing concern that artificial in -
telligence may replace some creative industry jobs, even if AI is still 
viewed as a tool to enhance human creativity. For example, graphic 
designers may lose their jobs when AI-powered design tools improve 
their ability to generate high-quality work with little human involve -
ment ( Amankwah-Amoah et al., 2024 ).
Fig. 11. Impact of AI on different professions. Source: Authors developed.
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
13 

5.3. Real-life case studies of the challenges arising from AI adoption in 
employment sectors
Adopting artificial intelligence is creating challenges to human 
employment and, in many cases, replacing humans. This section pre -
sents real-life case studies that illustrate how AI is challenging tradi -
tional notions of employment.
5.3.1. Waymo’s AI-Powered Robotaxi Service in San Francisco
In 2024, Alphabet Inc.’s (Google) self-driving car unit, Waymo, 
opened a first-of-its-kind robotaxi service in San Francisco, uti -
lizing Jaguar I-Pace electric vehicles equipped with AI technology. The 
fully autonomous vehicles that do not require a human in the driver’s 
seat are powered by a combination of sensors, cameras, and artificial 
intelligence algorithms used to drive safely on city streets. The fleet 
takes passengers on more than 10,000 rides each week, navigating 
through complex urban terrain with a safety track record that matches 
— and in some cases surpasses — that of human drivers. Riders call the 
vehicles through an app, and the taxis respond with precision, obeying 
traffic signals, sensing pedestrians, and avoiding obstacles in real-time. 
Waymo’s success in San Francisco has led to plans to expand the ser -
vice to other major cities, such as Austin and Los Angeles ( Fortson, 
2024 ).
5.3.2. Aparajita – Bangladesh’s first AI news anchor
Aparajita, the first AI news anchor in Bangladesh, reported on 
Channel 24 News in July 2023. With her commanding social media 
presence and human-like expressions, Aparajita was soon at the fore -
front of the new wave of broadcast journalism. It was 7 pm when she 
read the news in perfect articulation, without stammering or needing a 
rest. Engineers teamed up with journalists behind the scenes to feed 
Aparajita real-time scripts, changing the way news was produced and 
delivered. While many viewers wondered at this technological evolu -
tion, others were left to wonder what it meant for the future of human 
news presenters ( Tribune Desk, 2023 ).
5.3.3. IBM’s Watson’s detection of a rare leukemia case
The doctors at the University of Tokyo described a puzzling medical 
case they encountered in 2015 when a 60-year-old woman was not 
responding to standard treatment for what had been diagnosed as acute 
myeloid leukemia. Her condition did not improve despite weeks of ef -
fort. Then, as a last resort, the medical team called in IBM’s Watson, an 
artificial intelligence system trained to analyze vast datasets in medi -
cine. Watson raked through more than 20 million oncology records, 
cross-referencing them with the patient’s genetic data. In less than ten 
minutes, it found a rare subtype of leukemia, secondary leukemia from 
myelodysplastic syndromes, that human doctors missed. This break -
through enabled physicians to modify her treatment plan correctly, 
leading to a successful recovery ( Rohaidi, 2016 ).
5.3.4. Alpha School: Using AI to teach students
The school has come to look very different at Texas-based Alpha 
School, a private institution that flips the traditional classroom model. 
Rather than sitting through endless lectures, students learn the core 
academic subjects of math, science, and reading for only about two 
hours a day, with guidance coming almost entirely from artificial in -
telligence. The AI-driven system tailors lessons for each student’s pace 
and performance level, turning the learning experience into one that is 
highly personalized. During this time, students interact with AI-driven 
tools for academic learning, hence removing the need for human in -
structors. The school claims that its students learn 2.5 times faster than 
the national average ( Ravaglia, 2025 ).
5.3.5. AI helps Kenyan farmers grow more crops
Farmers such as Sammy Selim in Kericho, Kenya, use AI tools to 
grow more coffee. One tool, known as Virtual Agronomist, offers advice 
on when to plant, what fertilizers to use, and how to combat pests. 
Sammy’s coffee harvest tripled the following season after reading 
the guidelines. Another farmer, Musau Mutisya, identifies pests on his 
farm using an app called PlantVillage. Previously, he had to diagnose his 
plants’ problems, but now the app enables him to make the right 
choices. Since there is no other alternative, these tools are essential, 
especially since there are not enough agricultural engineers to visit 
every farmer in person. Some farmers continue to turn to conventional 
advice, but many view AI as simpler and more effective. However, as 
more farmers use these tools, the demand for human agricultural spe -
cialists is declining ( Mureithi, 2024 ).
6. Currently available guidelines mitigating the risk of adopting 
AI in the workplace
The widespread use of artificial intelligence in the workplace has 
necessitated specific regulations and policies to safeguard its ethical use 
while preserving job opportunities. Understanding and reviewing these 
currently available guidelines is crucial for examining the rigors of 
recently developed strategies and determining whether they are suffi -
cient to protect the interests of employees. Table 5 summarizes the 
existing guidelines where governments, academic institutions, and 
businesses have strongly emphasized openness, equity, diversity, and 
worker flexibility to reduce the risks associated with technological 
unemployment.
The European Commission (2019) provide a fundamental framework 
for the ethical application of AI for Trustworthy AI. These recommen -
dations support human-centric AI systems that are intended to enhance 
rather than replace human labor. They strongly emphasize equity, 
mandating that businesses reduce biases in AI systems, especially in 
recruiting and workplace assessments, where biases can disproportion -
ately affect underrepresented groups. Another fundamental idea is 
transparency, which ensures that those whom AI judgments may impact 
can be understood and convinced by them. Additionally, to help workers 
adjust to AI-driven roles and lower the risk of structural unemployment 
while promoting inclusive technology innovation, the guidelines advise 
making large expenditures in workforce retraining programs.
The U.S. Department of Labor (2024) further supports the necessity 
for ethical AI integration in the workplace. These guidelines guarantee 
accountability in automated decision-making processes by emphasizing 
human oversight as a non-negotiable component of AI systems. The rules 
acknowledge the increasing use of AI in workforce management and 
hiring and also address algorithmic biases that may unjustly harm 
particular demographic groups. The guidelines also encourage com -
panies to implement fair retraining programs that give employees the 
skills to meet changing job demands. These principles prioritize worker 
adaptation and fairness to balance social equity and innovation.
In the US, one such guideline is the New York City AI Employment 
Law, which requires yearly bias assessments for AI-powered employ -
ment systems. By detecting and reducing biases in AI systems, this Law 
guarantees adherence to anti-discrimination laws. To encourage 
accountability and openness in hiring procedures, employers must tell 
candidates about their usage of AI tools ( Paretti et al., 2023 ). The Cal -
ifornia Civil Rights Council Regulations also center on safeguarding 
workers’ rights in organizations that use artificial intelligence. These 
rules mandate that companies make sure automated decision-making 
procedures, like hiring and performance reviews, are inclusive and 
equitable ( Eanet, 2024 ). Additionally, by requiring firms to reveal the 
use of AI in hiring and performance management, California Bill 331 
improves workplace openness. Additionally, it mandates preserving 
AI-related employment records, facilitating accountability, and allowing 
workers to contest unfair judgments ( Micheli, 2023 ).
The AIDA Act of Singapore strongly emphasizes leveraging AI to 
increase productivity without taking the place of human labor. This Law 
guarantees that AI systems are open and responsible, especially in ap -
plications on work where human supervision is essential. The act 
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
14 

protects jobs and promotes economic progress by encouraging cooper -
ation between workers and AI systems ( Hall, 2022 ).
The AI100 Report from Stanford University highlights the ethical 
issues associated with automation and provides insights into the long- 
term effects of AI on employment. It supports extensive labor res -
killing initiatives and suggests regulations to guarantee that AI generates 
new opportunities rather than escalating inequality ( L. Littman et al., 
2021 ). MIT’s Work of the Future Initiative strongly emphasizes reima -
gining professions to encourage cooperation between humans and AI. It 
suggests automating monotonous jobs so employees can concentrate on 
strategic and innovative duties, increasing production and job satisfac -
tion ( Dizikes, 2020 ). The AI and Future Work examines how AI might 
help solve the world’s employment problems by generating new 
employment in developing industries and filling skill gaps in marginal -
ized populations ( Frey and Osborne, 2023 ). The Harvard University 
(2023) Recommendations promote ethical AI systems that prioritize 
worker rights, openness, and inclusivity, guaranteeing equitable treat -
ment for all demographic groups. Besides, AI in the Workplace from UC 
Berkeley emphasizes the necessity of strong labor laws and workplace 
regulations to guarantee AI complements human efforts rather than 
takes its place ( Bernhardt, 2024 ).
Tech companies have also created responsible AI frameworks 
prioritizing worker adaptation by integrating these legal and academic 
ideas into their internal policies. Google’s (2020) Responsible AI Prin -
ciples aims to develop AI systems that enhance human capabilities. 
Transparency, risk management, and the moral use of AI in industries 
like healthcare and energy are highlighted in their 2023 Progress 
Report. IBM (2020) strongly emphasize responsibility, equity, and 
workforce flexibility through programs like SkillsBuild, a platform that 
makes training easily accessible for employees moving into 
AI-supported professions. Microsoft (2024) supports worldwide skilling 
initiatives to train workers for AI-integrated industries while high -
lighting inclusivity and dependability in AI systems. One of Amazon 
(2024) is the Upskilling 2025 program, which retrains staff members for 
new positions in cloud computing and AI, focusing on workforce 
augmentation, explainability, and justice.
These guidelines developed by academia, industry, international 
organizations, and tech giants work together to offer a coherent 
framework for introducing AI into the workplace in a morally and 
responsibly appropriate manner. They strongly emphasize human 
monitoring, reskilling, and transparency, ensuring that AI promotes 
inclusive growth, increases productivity, and empowers workers while 
lowering the risks of technological unemployment.
While numerous existing guidelines concerning AI and employment 
are theoretically commendable, they often lack specificity and are not 
rigorously enforced. In these guidelines, there is significant discussion 
concerning the retraining of workers; however, in practice, not everyone 
has the necessary time, financial resources, or access to such programs. 
The current guidelines focus on fairness in hiring; however, the most 
critical thing that AI might replace humans is completely ignored. It is 
Table 5 
Summarizing the existing guidelines mitigating the risk of the adoption of AI in 
the workplace.
Accademia-based guidelines
Serial Guidelines Authority Focused Area
1 AI100 Report: 
Gathering Strength, 
Gathering Storms 
(2021)
Stanford 
University AI100 
Study
Addressing labor 
displacement threats, 
encouraging AI’s ethical 
use, and suggesting 
standards for upskilling 
programs.
2 Work of the Future 
Initiative (2020)
Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology (MIT)
Examining potential 
employment designs 
and developing more 
effective roles in the era 
of intelligent machines.
3 AI and Future Work 
(2024)
University of 
Oxford
Investigating AI’s effects 
on job design and 
potential to solve global 
employment issues.
4 AI Policy 
Recommendations 
(2023)
Harvard 
University
Promoting ethical AI 
development to 
safeguard rights and 
avoid job displacement 
in an automated 
economy.
5 AI in the Workplace 
(2024)
University of 
California, 
Berkeley
Encouraging legislation 
that prioritizes worker 
empowerment and 
justice while ensuring AI 
complements human 
labor rather than 
replaces it.
Country-based guidelines
1 US Department of Labor 
AI Principles (2024)
US Department of 
Labor
Prioritizing human 
oversight in AI 
decisions, fostering 
worker retraining 
initiatives, and 
establishing fair 
opportunities.
2 California Bill 331 
(2023)
California State 
Legislature
Increasing openness in 
algorithmic decision- 
making procedures and 
safeguarding workers’ 
rights against improper 
usage of AI at work.
3 Civil Rights Council AI 
Employment 
Regulations (2024)
California Civil 
Rights Council
Protecting employee 
rights, encouraging 
inclusive employment 
practices, and 
guaranteeing 
transparency in 
automated decision- 
making processes.
​ International organization-based guidelines
1 Ethics Guidelines for 
Trustworthy AI (2019)
European 
Commission
Supporting ethical AI in 
employment systems 
and encouraging worker 
retraining and skill 
development to avoid 
job displacement.
Tech giant company-based guidelines
1 Responsible AI 
Principles (2020)
Google Putting employee safety 
first, developing AI to 
support human 
professions, and 
concentrating on 
reskilling programs.
2 AI Ethics Guidelines 
(2020)
IBM Addressing labor rights, 
ensuring ethical AI 
development, and 
assisting skilling 
platforms via SkillsBuild 
programs.
3 Responsible AI Standard 
v2 (2022)
Microsoft Highlights the 
importance of human  
Table 5 (continued )
Accademia-based guidelines
Serial Guidelines Authority Focused Area
supervision and 
preventing potential 
biases in AI systems.
4 Amazon Responsible AI 
(2022)
Amazon Emphasizes the 
significance of human 
supervision and ongoing 
AI system monitoring to 
ensure the systems 
function as planned and 
don’t cause unexpected 
harm.
Source: Authors’ compiled
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
15 

generally encouraged to collaborate with machines; however, most of 
the time, AI engages in critical labor-intensive, risky jobs while humans 
engage comparatively in easy tasks; as a result, in the future, humans 
might be replaced by machines but not acknowledged by employers. Big 
tech companies make their own guidelines and do not develop such rules 
that may reduce their profit and increase costs. Without proper guide -
lines and their implementation, AI might replace humans while the 
company might pretend to be responsible. So, this study believes the 
available current guidelines are insufficient to protect the long-term 
unemployment of human workers, and thus, the employers and gov -
ernment should fully concentrate on the employees’ interest balancing 
with AI growth.
7. Conclusion and policy implications
The employment market has been the subject of significant discus -
sion due to the widespread application and rapid growth of artificial 
intelligence in various sectors of daily life. Thus, the potential adverse 
effects of AI on human employment are a significant concern, prompting 
several inquiries from academicians, employers, and employees. This 
study uses a systematic literature review (SLR) technique with preferred 
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) 
framework with bibliometrics analysis to investigate the current 
research trends regarding AI and the employment sector, the adverse 
consequences of AI’s integration into the workforce, sectors of the 
employment market that are currently and potentially susceptible to 
disrupt, some real-life cases where AI has already influenced, and the 
current strategies and available guidelines for mitigating the displace -
ment of human employment as a result of AI advancements. The final 
documents reviewed were selected using several inclusion and exclusion 
criteria when extracting data from the Scopus database from 2015 to 
July 9, 2025. We then reviewed 130 journal articles.
According to a bibliometric analysis, the years 2022–2024 witnessed 
the highest number of publications on the topic. With 47 publications, 
China placed first in research production, followed by the USA (33) and 
Germany (16). Out of all academic journals, the Academy of Management 
Perspectives has the most citations (157). Based on our review of this 
earlier research, we observed that significant changes in employment 
arrangements occur in several industries due to the incorporation of 
artificial intelligence into the workforce. Automation driven by AI has 
significantly increased productivity, efficiency, and decision-making 
capabilities while reducing the need for human interaction in repeti -
tive and routine tasks. AI has already brought about significant changes 
in the manufacturing, shipping, and retail sectors, where machines now 
perform tasks that humans formerly completed. In addition, AI is 
increasingly used for decision assistance, process automation, and pre -
dictive analytics in professional domains, including banking, healthcare, 
education, and legal services, changing rather than completely replacing 
employment responsibilities. The impact of AI is expected to continue 
growing over the next several years, necessitating ongoing skill devel -
opment, workforce adaptation, and the creation of new jobs in high- 
skilled occupations, creative industries, and critical corporate roles. 
Although artificial intelligence presents enormous potential for inno -
vation and economic growth, its rapid adoption raises concerns about 
skill mismatches, labor displacement, and widening economic dispar -
ities. The challenge is ensuring that AI is used in a way that enhances 
rather than replaces human abilities. To prepare workers for an AI- 
driven economy, researchers and policymakers stress the significance 
of reskilling and upskilling initiatives. In-depth research on the social 
and economic effects of AI is being conducted by educational in -
stitutions, which offer suggestions for utilizing AI to create jobs rather 
than eliminate them. Leading IT firms are also investing in workforce 
development initiatives, moral AI frameworks, and responsible AI 
governance to ensure that automation enhances human productivity 
rather than rendering labor obsolete.
The integration of artificial intelligence into the labor force requires 
some versatile policy responses that strike a balance between innovation 
and social welfare. We also provide actionable recommendations for 
government, enterprise, and individual workers to help them transition 
to this journey responsively and efficiently. The government of every 
country should develop and enact clear legislation regarding the use of 
artificial intelligence in the workplace, and the guidelines must include 
clear definitions of algorithmic transparency, data privacy, non- 
discrimination, and accountability issues in the workplace. The au -
thority must specify the actions that will protect transparency, privacy, 
and accountability, while also outlining the activities that will violate 
these principles. These guidelines should include provisions and 
mention of penalties; that is, if institutions violate existing laws, then 
these guidelines should specify the type of penalty that can be imposed 
against them. Another important issue is developing a regulatory 
sandbox that can test AI innovations safely, and the guidelines should 
make it mandatory for organizations to test every innovation through a 
sandbox to assess its feasibility. Besides, reforming the curriculum is 
crucial. To equip the next generation with the necessary skills, govern -
ments should incorporate digital literacy, data reasoning, and AI prin -
ciples into the school curriculum. In this case, the government can 
follow China’s initiative, where, in Beijing, elementary school students 
(six years old) are being trained in artificial intelligence, including 
chatbots and ethics. There are some other countries, namely Estonia, 
Canada, and South Korea, that are also integrating AI into their educa -
tion system ( The Economic Times, 2025 ).
Labor-intensive industries continue to be a significant source of 
employment and economic growth in many emerging nations; however, 
these countries may face challenges due to automation, potentially 
leading to job losses. South Asian nations, including Bangladesh, India, 
Nepal, and Pakistan, are renowned for their heavy reliance on low-cost 
manufacturing, textiles, construction, and agriculture. Similar to this, 
countries in Southeast Asia, such as Vietnam, Cambodia, Myanmar, 
Indonesia, and the Philippines, are well-known for having labor- 
intensive economies, particularly in the areas of services, agriculture, 
electronics assembly, and clothing. Nigeria, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, 
Tanzania, and Ghana are among the nations in Sub-Saharan Africa that 
depend on manual labor for small-scale manufacturing, mining, agri -
culture, and informal trade. Similar trends can be observed in Latin 
American nations such as Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Bolivia, 
where sizable segments of the population are employed in informal 
urban labor, agriculture, and textile manufacturing. These labor- 
intensive sectors in all these countries are also susceptible to automa -
tion through artificial intelligence. Thus, policymakers should develop 
large-scale, inclusive reskilling programs with a focus on vulnerable 
populations and areas, particularly those most at risk of job relocation.
Businesses must implement artificial intelligence in a way that fos -
ters inclusive growth rather than replacing vulnerable workers, espe -
cially in labor-intensive developing nations. For example, manufacturers 
in Bangladesh’s garment sector, considering the implementation of AI- 
powered quality control systems, should also fund reskilling programs 
for their sewing machine operators, enabling them to advance into po -
sitions requiring machine maintenance or supervision. Businesses 
should support greater societal resilience in addition to internal worker 
development. Businesses that utilize AI should allocate a portion of their 
earnings to research and development expenditures, to public-private 
skill development initiatives, or community-based training facilities. 
For instance, a Pakistani textile exporter implementing AI-based supply 
chain management might collaborate with technical colleges to educate 
young people in areas such as digital monitoring, data entry, or logistics 
software.
Workers in developing nations must adapt as artificial intelligence 
transforms established industries in order to protect their jobs and 
capitalize on new opportunities. Thousands of people work in the car 
assembly industry in Morocco ( Atalayar, 2024 ). By mastering machine 
interface operations, sensor calibration, and production data entry 
—skills that are increasingly commonly needed in semi-automated 
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
16 

plants — assembly workers can safeguard their positions. Besides, AI 
chatbots and speech automation are having an increasing impact on the 
call center industry, which employs thousands of young people in El 
Salvador ( Outsource Consultants, 2025 ). By gaining expertise in multi -
lingual content editing, AI tool supervision, or customer analytics, these 
workers can advance into more specialized service positions and 
future-proof their jobs.
8. Limitations of the study and future research directions
This study is not free from limitations. As this study only utilizes the 
Scopus database to extract scholarly articles, it overlooks other relevant 
databases that may contain pertinent documents related to our research. 
Additionally, our study is limited to July 9, 2025; however, as AI and its 
impact are a dynamic field, more scholarly publications may become 
available in the database, which could be excluded from this study. 
Thus, future research might combine Scopus with other relevant data -
bases (e.g., Web of Science, PubMed, Google Scholar, etc.). Besides, this 
study primarily focuses on how job dynamics might be affected by 
artificial intelligence, automation, and robotics, while overlooking the 
psychological and ethical dilemmas that may emerge from the appli -
cation of artificial intelligence technology. Thus, a separate study might 
be conducted to understand AI ’ s psychological effects and moral and 
ethical issues.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Meher Nigar: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal anal -
ysis. Uttam Golder: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Methodology, Investi -
gation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jannatul Ferdous Juli: 
Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis. 
Mohammad Kamal Hossain: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation. Mohammad 
Jahangir Alam: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Supervision, Methodology, Investigation.
Ethical Statement
This study does not involve human participants, animal subjects, or 
any sensitive personal data. Therefore, ethical approval was not 
required.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to all the anonymous reviewers for their 
valuable comments.
References
Abbasi, M., Nishat, R.I., Bond, C., Graham-Knight, J.B., Lasserre, P., Lucet, Y., & 
Najjaran, H. (2024). A Review of AI and Machine Learning Contribution in 
Predictive Business Process Management (Process Enhancement and Process 
Improvement Approaches) (No. arXiv:2407.11043). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.4855 
0/arXiv.2407.11043 .
Abu Talib, M., Nasir, Q., Dakalbab, F., Saud, H., 2025. Future aviation jobs: the role of 
technology in shaping skills and competencies. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. 
Complex. 11 (2), 100517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2025.100517 .
Acemoglu, D. (with National Bureau of Economic Research). (2024). The Simple 
Macroeconomics of AI. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alam, M.J., Molla, C., Misbauddin, S.M., Hossen, M.A., Golder, U., 2025. Determinants of 
adopting web-based systems for e-waste management and ensuring sustainable 
environment: evidence from Bangladesh. Clean. Waste Syst. 11, 100282. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.clwas.2025.100282 .
Alawamleh, M., Shammas, N., Alawamleh, K., Bani Ismail, L., 2024. Examining the 
limitations of AI in business and the need for human insights using interpretive 
structural modelling. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (3), 100338. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2024.100338 .
Ali, M.M., 2020. Digitization of the emerging economy: an exploratory and explanatory 
case study. J. Gov. Regul. 9 (4), 25. 〈 https://virtusinterpress.org/Digitization-of-the- 
emerging-economy-An-exploratory-and-explanatory-case-study.html 〉 .
Ali, M., Khan, T.I., Khattak, M.N., S ¸ ener, 
˙
I., 2024. Synergizing AI and business: 
maximizing innovation, creativity, decision precision, and operational efficiency in 
high-tech enterprises. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (3), 100352. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2024.100352 .
Amankwah-Amoah, J., Abdalla, S., Mogaji, E., Elbanna, A., Dwivedi, Y.K., 2024. The 
impending disruption of creative industries by generative AI: opportunities, 
challenges, and research agenda. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 79, 102759. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2024.102759 .
Amazon. (2024). Responsible AI. Amazon Web Services, Inc. https://aws.amazon.com/ 
ai/responsible-ai/.
Arawi, T., El Bachour, J., El Khansa, T., 2024. The fourth industrial revolution: its impact 
on artificial intelligence and Medicine in developing countries. Asian Bioeth. Rev. 16 
(3), 513 – 526. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41649-024-00284-7 .
Atalayar. (2024). Exports from Morocco ’ s automotive industry continue to grow. 
Atalayar. https://www.atalayar.com/en/articulo/economy-and-business/exports- 
from-moroccos-automotive-industry-continue-to-grow/20240210060000196541. 
html.
Ayaz, A., Yanartas ¸ , M., 2020. An analysis on the unified theory of acceptance and use of 
technology theory (UTAUT): acceptance of electronic document management system 
(EDMS). Comput. Hum. Behav. Rep. 2, 100032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chbr.2020.100032 .
Barua, S., Golder, U., Chowdhury, R.S., Sharmeen, K., 2025. Implications of NFT as a 
sustainable fintech innovation for sustainable development and entrepreneurship. 
Sustain. Technol. Entrep. 4 (2), 100099. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
stae.2025.100099 .
Bellini, A. (2024). AI has Changed the Freelance Job Market — Here ’ s the Proof from 
Upwork. Medium. 〈 https://medium.com/@abebellini/ai-has-changed-the-freelance- 
job-market-heres-the-proof-from-upwork-c6c92826bdc6 〉 .
Berg, J., & Rani, U. (2018). Digital labour platforms and the future of work. 〈 https:// 
www.ilo.org/sites/default/files/wcmsp5/groups/public/%40dgreports/%40dc 
omm/%40publ/documents/publication/wcms_645337.pdf 〉 .
Bernhardt, A. (2024, August 7). AI in the Workplace: Ensuring New Technologies Work 
for Workers. UC Berkeley Labor Center. https://laborcenter.berkeley.edu/ai-in-the- 
workplace-ensuring-new-technologies-work-for-workers/.
Bhattacharyya, S.S., Nair, S., 2019. Explicating the future of work: perspectives from 
India. J. Manag. Dev. 38 (3), 175 – 194. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMD-01-2019- 
0032 .
Biswas, A.A., Shahriar, A.H.M., Alam, M.J., Kuddus, R., Golder, U., Paul, M.R., 2023. 
Rethinking FDI policy in Bangladesh: an asymmetric approach to globalization, 
population, and trade. Int. J. Econ. Financ. Issues 13 (6), 168 – 176. https://doi.org/ 
10.32479/ijefi.15391 .
Boavida, N., Candeias, M., 2021. Recent automation trends in Portugal: implications on 
industrial productivity and employment in automotive sector. Societies 11 (3). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/soc11030101 .
Borsato, A., Lorentz, A., 2023. The Kaldor – Verdoorn law at the age of robots and AI. Res. 
Policy 52 (10), 104873. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104873 .
Brynjolfsson, E., McAfee, A., 2014. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and 
Prosperity in A Time of Brilliant Technologies. W W Norton & Co, p. 306 .
Callon, M., Courtial, J.P., Laville, F., 1991. Co-word analysis as a tool for describing the 
network of interactions between basic and technological research: the case of 
polymer chemsitry. Scientometrics 22 (1), 155 – 205. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF02019280 .
Callon, M., Courtial, J.-P., Turner, W.A., Bauin, S., 1983. From translations to 
problematic networks: an introduction to co-word analysis. Soc. Sci. Inf. 22 (2), 
191 – 235. https://doi.org/10.1177/053901883022002003 .
Cao, J., Yao, J., Sun, S., Song, Z., Zhang, F., 2025. Not all forms of artificial intelligence 
are perceived equal: AI functions and work outcomes. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. 
Complex. 11 (2), 100521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2025.100521 .
Carrera-Rivera, A., Ochoa, W., Larrinaga, F., Lasa, G., 2022. How-to conduct a systematic 
literature review: a quick guide for computer science research. MethodsX 9, 101895. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mex.2022.101895 .
Case, T. (2024, November 13). AI skills gap widens: Employers embrace AI, but 
employees left behind. WorkLife. https://www.worklife.news/technology/ai-skills- 
gap-widens-employers-embrace-ai-but-employees-left-behind/.
Cherif, S., Gourida, S., 2025. Technological unemployment in terms of global labor 
market imbalances: bibliometric analysis. Braz. J. Bus. 7 (1). https://doi.org/ 
10.34140/bjbv7n1-039 .
Chomanski, B., 2019. Massive technological unemployment without redistribution: a 
case for cautious optimism. Sci. Eng. Ethics 25 (5), 1389 – 1407. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11948-018-0070-0 .
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
17 

Civaner, M.M., Uncu, Y., Bulut, F., Chalil, E.G., Tatli, A., 2022. Artificial intelligence in 
medical education: a cross-sectional needs assessment. BMC Med. Educ. 22 (1), 772. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-022-03852-3 .
Cobo, M.J., L ´opez-Herrera, A.G., Herrera-Viedma, E., Herrera, F., 2011. An approach for 
detecting, quantifying, and visualizing the evolution of a research field: a practical 
application to the fuzzy sets theory field. J. Informetr. 5 (1), 146 – 166. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.joi.2010.10.002 .
Dall ’ Anese, D. (2024). The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Unemployment: A 
Systematic Literature Review. https://unitesi.unive.it/handle/20.500.14247/5760? 
mode = simple.
Dancausa Mill ´an, M.G., Mill ´an V ´azquez de la Torre, M.G., 2024. An economic 
perspective on the implementation of artificial intelligence in the restaurant sector. 
Adm. Sci. 14 (9). https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci14090214 .
Davis, F.D., Grani ´c, A., 2024. The Technology Acceptance Model: 30 Years of TAM. 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45274-2 .
De Oliveira Neto, G.C., Do Prado Soares, O., Costa, B.K., Da Silva, R.N.B., Da Costa, P.R., 
Bernardes, R., Rodrigues, F.L., De Carvalho, A.S., Da Silva, D., 2025. Impact 
measuring the of technological innovation driven by co-creation of value on the 
performance of multinationals in emerging markets. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. 
Complex. 11 (2), 100511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2025.100511 .
Ding, L., Meng, L., 2014. A comparative study of thematic mapping and scientific 
visualization. Ann. GIS 20 (1), 23 – 37. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
19475683.2013.862856 .
Dizikes, P. (2020, November 17). Report outlines route toward better jobs, wider 
prosperity. MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology. https://news.mit. 
edu/2020/work-of-future-final-report-1117.
Donthu, N., Kumar, S., Mukherjee, D., Pandey, N., Lim, W.M., 2021. How to conduct a 
bibliometric analysis: an overview and guidelines. J. Bus. Res. 133, 285 – 296. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.04.070 .
Eanet, M. (2024). Civil Rights Council Announces Proposed AI Regulations. Eanet, PC. 
https://www.eanetpc.com/news-insights/2024/june/civil-rights-council- 
announces-proposed-ai-regul/.
Egana-delSol, P., Bustelo, M., Ripani, L., Soler, N., Viollaz, M., 2022. Automation in latin 
america: are women at higher risk of losing their jobs? Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change 175, 121333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121333 .
Elgammal, A., Liu, B., Elhoseiny, M., & Mazzone, M. (2017). CAN: Creative Adversarial 
Networks, Generating “ Art ” by Learning About Styles and Deviating from Style 
Norms (No. arXiv:1706.07068). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.07068 .
Ernst, E., Merola, R., Samaan, D., 2019. Economics of artificial intelligence: implications 
for the future of work. IZA J. Labor Policy 9 (1), 20190004. https://doi.org/ 
10.2478/izajolp-2019-0004 .
Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R.A., Ko, J., Swetter, S.M., Blau, H.M., Thrun, S., 2017. 
Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 
542 (7639), 115 – 118. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21056 .
European Commission. (2019). Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI. https://digital- 
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai.
Fortson, D. (2024). How Google turned Jaguars into self-driving taxis, but General 
Motors gave up. https://www.thetimes.com/business-money/companies/article/ 
how-google-turned-jaguars-into-self-driving-taxis-but-general-motors-gave-up- 
9lvsqfw02?utm_source = chatgpt.com & region = global.
Fossen, F.M., Sorgner, A., 2022. New digital technologies and heterogeneous wage and 
employment dynamics in the United States: evidence from individual-level data. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 175, 121381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2021.121381 .
Frank, M.R., Autor, D., Bessen, J.E., Brynjolfsson, E., Cebrian, M., Deming, D.J., 
Feldman, M., Groh, M., Lobo, J., Moro, E., Wang, D., Youn, H., Rahwan, I., 2019. 
Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on labor. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 116 (14), 6531 – 6539. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1900949116 .
Frey, C.B., & Osborne, M. (2023). Generative AI and the Future of Work: A Reappraisal. 
Oxford Martin School. https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/publications/ 
generative-ai-and-the-future-of-work-a-reappraisal.
Garcia-Murillo, M., MacInnes, I., 2019. AI ’ s path to the present and the painful 
transitions along the way. Digit. Policy Regul. Gov. 21 (3), 305 – 321. https://doi.org/ 
10.1108/DPRG-09-2018-0051 .
Gera, I., Singh, S., 2019. A critique of economic literature on technology and fourth 
industrial revolution: employment and the nature of jobs. Indian J. Labour Econ. 62 
(4), 715 – 729. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41027-019-00191-8 .
Ghosh, D., Ghosh, R., Roy Chowdhury, S., Ganguly, B., 2025. AI-exposure and labour 
market: a systematic literature review on estimations, validations, and perceptions. 
Manag. Rev. Q. 75 (1), 677 – 704. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-023-00393-x .
Ghosh, P., Golder, U., Rahman, Md.S., Rumaly, N., 2024. Mezzanine momentum: a cross 
continental examination of corporate financing trends. J. Econ. Manag. 46, 387 – 423. 
https://doi.org/10.22367/jem.2024.46.15 .
Goethals, F., Ziegelmayer, J.L., 2021. Anxiety buffers and the threat of extreme 
automation: a terror management theory perspective. Inf. Technol. People 35 (1), 
96 – 118. https://doi.org/10.1108/ITP-06-2019-0304 .
Golder, U., Barua, S., 2025. Analysing FinTech equity funding flows and FinTech deals 
globally. Glob. Bus. Econ. Rev. 32 (2), 215 – 232. https://doi.org/10.1504/ 
GBER.2025.144242 .
Golder, U., Barua, S., Abedin, M.Z., Adu, D.A., Ren, B., 2024. Determinants of FinTech 
equity funding flows: evidence from a global perspective. Int. J. Financ. Econ. ijfe 
3086. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijfe.3086 .
Golder, U., Islam, Md.N., Kayser, Md.S., 2020. Impact of foreign exchange reserve, 
exchange rate and crude oil price on Dhaka stock exchange index: an empirical 
evidence from vector error correction model. Indian J. Financ. Bank. 4 (1), 134 – 143. 
https://doi.org/10.46281/ijfb.v4i1.633 .
Golder, U., Rumaly, N., Hossain, M.K., Nigar, M., 2023. Financial progress, inward 
remittances, and economic growth in Bangladesh: is the nexus asymmetric? Heliyon 
9 (3), e14454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14454 .
Golder, U., Rumaly, N., Shahriar, A.H.M., Alam, M.J., Biswas, A.A., Islam, M.N., 2022. 
The impact of COVID-19 on the volatility of Bangladeshi stock market: evidence 
from GJR-GARCH model. J. Asian Financ. Econ. Bus. 9 (4), 29 – 38. https://doi.org/ 
10.13106/JAFEB.2022.VOL9.NO4.0029 .
Golder, U., Sheikh, Md.I., Sultans, F., 2021. The relationship between foreign aid and 
economic growth: empirical evidence from Bangladesh. J. Asian Financ. Econ. Bus. 8 
(4), 625 – 633. https://doi.org/10.13106/JAFEB.2021.VOL8.NO4.0625 .
Golder, U., Sultana, F., Hossain, M.K., Hossen, M.A., Hossain, Md.M., 2021. Finance- 
Growth nexus in Bangladesh: is it important to quantify financial development? 
Univers. J. Account. Financ. 9 (5), 961 – 971. https://doi.org/10.13189/ 
ujaf.2021.090507 .
Goldsmith, A.H., Casey, J.F., 2024. The fourth industrial revolution and the future of 
work: reasons to worry and policies to consider. South. Econ. J. 91 (2), 333 – 350. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/soej.12714 .
Google. (2020). AI Principles. https://ai.google/responsibility/principles/.
Goyal, A., Aneja, R., 2020. Artificial intelligence and income inequality: do technological 
changes and worker ’ s position matter? J. Public Aff. 20 (4), e2326. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/pa.2326 .
Graefe, A., 2016. Guide Autom. J. https://doi.org/10.7916/D80G3XDJ .
Guliyev, H., 2023. Artificial intelligence and unemployment in high-tech developed 
countries: new insights from dynamic panel data model. Res. Glob. 7, 100140. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resglo.2023.100140 .
Hall, I. (2022). Singapore authority publishes ‘methodologies ’ for responsible AI. 〈 https: 
//www.globalgovernmentfintech.com/singapore-authority-publishes-methodolo 
gies-for-responsible-ai/ 〉 .
Harvard University, 2023. Initial guidelines for using ChatGPT and other generative AI 
tools at Harvard. https://www.huit.harvard.edu/news/ai-guidelines.
Heffernan, N.T., Heffernan, C.L., 2014. The ASSISTments ecosystem: building a platform 
that brings scientists and teachers together for minimally invasive research on 
human learning and teaching. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. 24 (4), 470 – 497. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s40593-014-0024-x .
Heinrich, T., Witko, C., 2021. Technology-Induced job loss and the prioritization of 
economic problems in the mass public. Rev. Policy Res. 38 (2), 164 – 179. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/ropr.12418 .
Hlatshwayo, M., 2023. The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into business 
processes. ResearchGate. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10893971 .
Hossain, M.K., Golder, U., 2022. The impact of credit risk management on the financial 
performance of the banks listed on the Dhaka stock exchange: a Two-Step system 
generalized method of moments panel data analysis. Econ. Financ. Lett. 9 (2), 
273 – 290. https://doi.org/10.18488/29.v9i2.3195 .
Hu, P., Zeng, Y., Wang, D., Teng, H., 2024. Too much light blinds: the transparency- 
resistance paradox in algorithmic management. Comput. Hum. Behav. 161, 108403. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2024.108403 .
IBM. (2020). AI Ethics. https://www.ibm.com/artificial-intelligence/ai-ethics.
Jain, R., Kumar, S., Sood, K., Grima, S., Rupeika-Apoga, R., 2023. A systematic literature 
review of the risk landscape in fintech. Risks 11 (2). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
risks11020036 .
Jones, J.A., 2023. Expanding understandings of ‘Work ’ in response to AI. Humanist. 
Manag. J. 8 (3), 379 – 397. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41463-023-00163-7 .
Jrad, M., 2023. A role of artificial intelligence in the context of economy: bibliometric 
analysis and systematic literature review. Int. J. Membr. Sci. Technol. 10 (3). 
https://doi.org/10.15379/ijmst.v10i3.1756 .
Kassa, B.Y., Worku, E.K., 2025. The impact of artificial intelligence on organizational 
performance: the mediating role of employee productivity. J. Open Innov. Technol. 
Mark. Complex. 11 (1), 100474. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2025.100474 .
Kermani, M.A.M.A., Seddighi, H.R., & Maghsoudi, M. (2024). Revolutionizing Process 
Mining: A Novel Architecture for ChatGPT Integration and Enhanced User 
Experience through Optimized Prompt Engineering (No. arXiv:2405.10689). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.10689 .
Kochetova, L., 2023. Linguocultural specifics of artificial intelligence representation in 
the English language media discourse: Corpus-Based approach. Vestn. Volgogr. Gos. 
Univ. Ser. 2. Jazyk. (5), 6 – 18. https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2023.5.1 .
Korinek, A., & Stiglitz, J.E. (With National Bureau of Economic Research). (2017). 
Artificial Intelligence and Its Implications for Income Distribution and 
Unemployment. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Korinek, A., & Stiglitz, J.E. (With National Bureau of Economic Research). (2021). 
Artificial Intelligence, Globalization, and Strategies for Economic Development. 
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krishna, V.V., 2024. A I and contemporary challenges: the good, bad and the scary. 
J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (1), 100178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joitmc.2023.100178 .
L. Littman, M., Ajunwa, I., Berger, G., Boutilier, C., Currie, M., Doshi-Velez, F., Hadfield, 
G., C. Horowitz, M., Isbell, C., Kitano, H., Levy, K., Lyons, T., Mitchell, M., Shah, J., 
Sloman, S., Vallor, S., & Walsh, T. (2021). Gathering Strength, Gathering Storms: 
The One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100) 2021 Study Panel 
Report | One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). 〈 https://ai100. 
stanford.edu/gathering-strength-gathering-storms-one-hundred-year-study-artificia 
l-intelligence-ai100-2021-study 〉 .
Lada, S., Chekima, B., Ansar, R., Abdul Jalil, M.I., Fook, L.M., Geetha, C., Bouteraa, M., 
Abdul Karim, M.R., 2023. Islamic economy and sustainability: a bibliometric 
analysis using r. Sustainability 15 (6). https://doi.org/10.3390/su15065174 .
Lada, S., Chekima, B., Karim, Mohd R.A., Fabeil, N.F., Ayub, M.S., Amirul, S.M., 
Ansar, R., Bouteraa, M., Fook, L.M., Zaki, H.O., 2023. Determining factors related to 
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
18 

artificial intelligence (AI) adoption among Malaysia ’ s small and medium-sized 
businesses. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 9 (4), 100144. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.joitmc.2023.100144 .
Lee, D., Yoon, S.N., 2021. Application of artificial Intelligence-Based technologies in the 
healthcare industry: opportunities and challenges. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
18 (1), 271. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18010271 .
Li, C.P., Augustus J.Panton, Marina Mendes Tavares, Mauro Cazzaniga, Longji. (2023). 
Labor Market Exposure to AI: Cross-country Differences and Distributional 
Implications. IMF. 〈 https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/1 
0/04/Labor-Market-Exposure-to-AI-Cross-country-Differences-and-Distributional- 
Implications-539656 〉 .
Lima, Y., Barbosa, C.E., dos Santos, H.S., de Souza, J.M., 2021. Understanding 
technological unemployment: a review of causes, consequences, and solutions. 
Societies 11 (2). https://doi.org/10.3390/soc11020050 .
Linnenluecke, M.K., Marrone, M., Singh, A.K., 2020. Conducting systematic literature 
reviews and bibliometric analyses. Aust. J. Manag. 45 (2), 175 – 194. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0312896219877678 .
Loong, Z., Ai, X., Huang, T., Xiang, S., 2022. The impact of AI on employment and the 
corresponding response of PRC labor law. J. Chin. Hum. Resour. Manag. 12 (2), 
69 – 94. https://doi.org/10.47297/wspchrmWSP2040-800506.20211202 .
Maity, S., 2022. Review of artificial intelligence: a driver of unemployment or navigation 
towards a prospective future? Int. J. Curr. Sci. Res. Rev. 05 (08). https://doi.org/ 
10.47191/ijcsrr/V5-i8-56 .
McGaughey, E., & Research, C. for B. (2018). Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full 
Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy [Working Paper]. Centre for 
Business Research, University of Cambridge. 〈 https://econpapers.repec.org/paper/ 
cbrcbrwps/wp496.htm 〉 .
Micheli, C. (2023). AB 331: AI Tools – California Globe. https://californiaglobe.com/ 
articles/ab-331-ai-tools/.
Microsoft. (2024). Microsoft Responsible AI. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ 
principles-and-approach.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G., The PRISMA Group, 2009. Preferred 
reporting items for systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses: the PRISMA statement. 
PLoS Med. 6 (7), e1000097. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097 .
Morandini, S., Fraboni, F., De Angelis, M., Puzzo, G., Giusino, D., Pietrantoni, L., 2023. 
The impact of artificial intelligence on Workers ’ skills: upskilling and reskilling in 
organisations. Inform. Sci. Int. J. Emerg. Transdiscipl. 26, 039 – 068. https://doi.org/ 
10.28945/5078 .
Mureithi, C. (2024). High Tech, High Yields? the Kenyan Farmers Deploying Ai to 
Increase Productivity. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/ 
sep/30/high-tech-high-yields-the-kenyan-farmers-deploying-ai-to-increase- 
productivity.
Mutascu, M., 2021. Artificial intelligence and unemployment: new insights. Econ. Anal. 
Policy 69, 653 – 667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2021.01.012 .
Napoli, P.M., 2014. On automation in media industries: integrating algorithmic media 
production into media industries scholarship. Media Ind. J. 1 (1). https://doi.org/ 
10.3998/mij.15031809.0001.107 .
Nguyen, Q.P., Vo, D.H., 2022. Artificial intelligence and unemployment:an international 
evidence. Struct. Change Econ. Dyn. 63, 40 – 55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
strueco.2022.09.003 .
Occhipinti, J.-A., Hynes, W., Prodan, A., Eyre, H.A., Green, R., Burrow, S., Tanner, M., 
Buchanan, J., Ujdur, G., Destrebecq, F., Song, C., Carnevale, S., Hickie, I.B., & 
Heffernan, M. (2024). In the Shadow of Smith`s Invisible Hand: Risks to Economic 
Stability and Social Wellbeing in the Age of Intelligence (No. arXiv:2407.01545). 
arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.01545 .
Outsource Consultants. (2025). Why Call Centers in El Salvador Is Emerging as the 
Smartest 2025 Play for CX Leaders. https://www.outsource-consultants.com/blog/ 
why-call-centers-in-el-salvador-is-emerging-as-the-smartest-2025-play-for-cx- 
leaders/.
Ozgul, P., Fregin, M.-C., Stops, M., Janssen, S., & Levels, M. (2024). High-skilled Human 
Workers in Non-Routine Jobs are Susceptible to AI Automation but Wage Benefits 
Differ between Occupations (No. arXiv:2404.06472). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.4855 
0/arXiv.2404.06472 .
Page, M.J., McKenzie, J.E., Bossuyt, P.M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T.C., Mulrow, C.D., 
Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J.M., Akl, E.A., Brennan, S.E., Chou, R., Glanville, J., 
Grimshaw, J.M., Hr ´objartsson, A., Lalu, M.M., Li, T., Loder, E.W., Mayo-Wilson, E., 
McDonald, S., Moher, D., 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline 
for reporting systematic reviews. PLoS Med. 18 (3), e1003583. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pmed.1003583 .
Panichakarn, B., Pochan, J., Shafiq, M., Saleem, I., Wang, Y., Nazeer, S., 2024. The 
interplay of digital transformation, agility, environmental volatility, and innovation 
to spur enterprise performance: evidence from Chinese electric vehicle firms. J. Open 
Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (4), 100408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joitmc.2024.100408 .
Papandreou, T. (2024). AI And The Gig Economy Is Reshaping The Workforce. Here ’ s 
How. Forbes. 〈 https://www.forbes.com/sites/timothypapandreou/2024/10/03/ai- 
and-the-gig-economy-is-reshaping-the-workforce-heres-how/ 〉 .
Paretti, J., Ray, N., Freedberg, E., April 13, E. M. on, & 2023New York City Adopts Final 
Regulations on Use of AI in Hiring and Promotion, Extends Enforcement Date to July 
5, 2023. Littler Mendelson P.C. https://www.littler.com/publication-press/ 
publication/new-york-city-adopts-final-regulations-use-ai-hiring-and-promotion.
Polyportis, A., Pahos, N., 2025. Understanding students ’ adoption of the ChatGPT 
chatbot in higher education: the role of anthropomorphism, trust, design novelty and 
institutional policy. Behav. Inf. Technol. 44 (2), 315 – 336. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
0144929X.2024.2317364 .
Prasetyo, M.L., Peranginangin, R.A., Martinovic, N., Ichsan, M., Wicaksono, H., 2025. 
Artificial intelligence in open innovation project management: a systematic 
literature review on technologies, applications, and integration requirements. 
J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 11 (1), 100445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joitmc.2024.100445 .
Qureshi, M.I., Khan, N., Qayyum, S., Malik, S., Hishan, S.S., Ramayah, T., 2020. 
Classifications of sustainable manufacturing practices in ASEAN region: a systematic 
review and bibliometric analysis of the past decade of research. Sustainability 12 
(21). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12218950 .
Rahman, M.S., Golder, U., Ghosh, P., 2024. Corporate investment in artificial 
intelligence: the role of GDP, ICT exports, and patents. J. Econ. Manag. 46 (1), 
613 – 636. https://doi.org/10.22367/jem.2024.46.21 .
Rane, N.L., Mallick, S.K., Kaya, 
¨
O., Rane, J., 2024. Applications of machine learning in 
healthcare, finance, agriculture, retail, manufacturing, energy, and transportation: a 
review. Deep Science Publishing. https://doi.org/10.70593/978-81-981271-4-3 .
Rangwala, R. (2024, August 21). Stanford Social Innovation Review | Startups Are 
Making the Global Gig Economy Bigger. But Can They Make It Better? Accion. 
https://www.accion.org/news/stanford-social-innovation-review-startups-are- 
making-the-global-gig-economy-bigger-but-can-they-make-it-better/.
Ravaglia, R. (2025). Alpha School: Using AI To Unleash Students And Transform 
Teaching. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/rayravaglia/2025/02/10/alpha- 
school-using-ai-to-unleash-students-and-transform-teaching/.
Rohaidi, N. (2016). IBM ’ s Watson Detected Rare Leukemia In Just 10 min – Asian 
Scientist Magazine. https://www.asianscientist.com/2016/08/topnews/ibm- 
watson-rare-leukemia-university-tokyo-artificial-intelligence/?utm_source = chatgpt. 
com.
Ro ˇsa, A., Aldrena, A.M., Lace, N., 2025. Evaluating progress toward achieving the quality 
of employment and decent work: the development of the model. J. Open Innov. 
Technol. Mark. Complex. 11 (2), 100510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joitmc.2025.100510 .
Rumaly, N., Hasan, M.M., Golder, U., Roy, B., 2025. The Russia-Ukraine war and stock 
market volatility: lessons from selected south asian countries. Int. J. Dipl. Econ. 11 
(1), 82 – 99. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJDIPE.2025.144000 .
Saleem, I., Al-Breiki, N.S.S., Asad, M., 2024. The nexus of artificial intelligence, frugal 
innovation and business model innovation to nurture internationalization: a survey 
of SME ’ s readiness. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (3), 100326. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2024.100326 .
Schrieberg, E. (2024). AI and the human factor in the financial industry of the future. 
VitalBriefing. https://vitalbriefing.com/industry/fintech/artificial-intelligence-in- 
financial-service/.
Schumpeter, J.A., 2013. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, 5th ed. Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203202050 .
Shah, A. (2024). Universal Basic Income: A Solution to Economic Inequality or an 
Unsustainable Policy? The Sunday Diplomat. https://thesundaydiplomat.com/ 
universal-basic-income-a-solution-to-economic-inequality-or-an-unsustainable- 
policy/.
Shahriar, A.H.M., Biswas, A.A., Rumaly, N., Rayhan, Md.J., Alam, M.J., Golder, U., 2024. 
Macroeconomic stability in Bangladesh: unraveling the nexus between exchange 
rate, inflation, and export dynamics through nonlinear modeling. Int. J. Econ. 
Financ. Issues 14 (6), 174 – 181. https://doi.org/10.32479/ijefi.16968 .
Sheffi, Y., 2024. Technology is not enough: Potential job displacement in an AI-driven 
future. J. Supply Chain Manag. Log. Procurem. https://hstalks.com/article 
/8525/technology-is-not-enough-potential-job-displacemen/ .
Shen, Y., Zhang, X., 2024. The impact of artificial intelligence on employment: the role of 
virtual agglomeration. Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun. 11 (1), 1 – 14. https://doi.org/ 
10.1057/s41599-024-02647-9 .
Shin, M., Kim, J., van Opheusden, B., Griffiths, T.L., 2023. Superhuman artificial 
intelligence can improve human decision-making by increasing novelty. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 120 (12), e2214840120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214840120 .
Shu, F., Julien, C.-A., Zhang, L., Qiu, J., Zhang, J., Larivi `ere, V., 2019. Comparing journal 
and paper level classifications of science. J. Informetr. 13 (1), 202 – 225. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.joi.2018.12.005 .
Sidek, S., Hasbolah, H., Rahman, M.K., Samad, N.S.A., Abdullah, Z., Zoraimi, N.H.N., 
Khadri, N.A.M., Hassin, N.H., 2024. Analyzing barriers to cyberpreneurship 
adoption. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 10 (3), 100313. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.joitmc.2024.100313 .
Soulami, M., Benchekroun, S., Galiulina, A., 2024. Exploring how AI adoption in the 
workplace affects employees: a bibliometric and systematic review. Front. Artif. 
Intell. 7, 1473872. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2024.1473872 .
Stojanova, H., Lietavcova, B., Vrdoljak Ragu ˇz, I., 2019. The dependence of 
unemployment of the senior workforce upon explanatory variables in the european 
union in the context of industry 4.0. Soc. Sci. 8 (1). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
socsci8010029 .
Subaveerapandiyan, A., Shimray, S.R., 2024. The evolution of job displacement in the 
age of AI and automation: a bibliometric review (1984 – 2024). Open Inf. Sci. 8 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.1515/opis-2024-0010 .
Tamayo, J., Doumi, L., Goel, S., Kov ´acs-Ondrejkovic, O., & Sadun, R. (2023, September 
1). Reskilling in the Age of AI. Harvard Business Review. 〈 https://hbr.org/2023/ 
09/reskilling-in-the-age-of-ai 〉 .
Tan, Z.M., Aggarwal, N., Cowls, J., Morley, J., Taddeo, M., Floridi, L., 2021. The ethical 
debate about the gig economy: a review and critical analysis. Technol. Soc. 65, 
101594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101594 .
Thamik, H., Wu, J., 2022. The impact of artificial intelligence on sustainable 
development in electronic markets. Sustainability 14 (6). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
su14063568 .
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
19 

The Economic Times. (2025). China starts training six-year-olds in AI to develop future 
tech leaders like DeepSeek ’ s Liang Wenfeng. https://economictimes.indiatimes. 
com/news/new-updates/china-starts-training-six-year-olds-in-ai-to-develop-future- 
tech-leaders-like-deepseeks-liang-wenfeng/articleshow/118930556.cms?from = mdr.
Trammell, P., & Korinek, A. (with National Bureau of Economic Research). (2023). 
Economic Growth under Transformative AI. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Tribune Desk. (2023). Aparajita: Bangladesh ’ s first AI news anchor on Channel 24. 
Dhaka Tribune. https://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/320677/aparajita- 
bangladesh-s-first-ai-news-anchor-on.
Tülüce, N.S., Yurtkur, A.K., 2015. Term of strategic entrepreneurship and Schumpeter ’ s 
creative destruction theory. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 207, 720 – 728. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.10.146 .
U.S. Department of Labor. (2024). AI Best Practices roadmap for developers, employers, 
building on AI principles for worker well-being. DOL. https://www.dol.gov/ 
newsroom/releases/osec/osec20241016.
Xiao, Y., Watson, M., 2019. Guidance on conducting a systematic literature review. 
J. Plan. Educ. Res. 39 (1), 93 – 112. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X17723971 .
Xu, Z., Su, C., Xiao, Y., Wang, F., 2022. Artificial intelligence for COVID-19: battling the 
pandemic with computational intelligence. Intell. Med. 2 (1), 13 – 29. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.imed.2021.09.001 .
Xue, L., Rashid, A.M., Ouyang, S., 2024. The unified theory of acceptance and use of 
technology (UTAUT) in higher education: a systematic review. Sage Open 14 (1), 
21582440241229570. https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440241229570 .
Yaiprasert, C., Hidayanto, A.N., 2024. AI-powered in the digital age: ensemble 
innovation personalizes the food recommendations. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. 
Complex. 10 (2), 100261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joitmc.2024.100261 .
Yeh, C.C.R., Wong, C.C.J., Chang, W.W.V., Lai, C.C.S., 2020. Labor displacement in 
artificial intelligence era: a systematic literature review. Taiwan J. East Asian Stud. 
17 (2), 25 – 75. https://doi.org/10.6163/TJEAS.202012_17(2).0002 .
Zhou, L., Abdullah, M.A.R., Abdullah, S.N.S., Peng, J., 2025. The impact of ChatGPT on 
Part-Time translators working with the English language: a threat or a 
complementary tool? World J. Engl. Lang. 15 (7). https://doi.org/10.5430/wjel. 
v15n7p103 .
M. Nigar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 11 (2025) 100607 
20