DATA BRIEF
AUTOMATION, 
GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB 
DISPLACEMENT RISK IN 
U.S. EMPLOYMENT

2 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
PURPOSE
How will advances in automation technology and generative AI reshape the world of work? Based on 
recent news, one could be forgiven for concluding that human workers will soon go the way of the 
dinosaurs, with some headlines predicting dire outcomes such as imminent mass unemployment.¹  To 
be sure, many employers are rapidly incorporating new technology to automate tasks; however, the net 
effect of this technological shift will be complex and is currently poorly understood.
As a first step toward improving our knowledge in this area, SHRM fielded a large-scale survey of 
U.S. workers in the spring of 2025 (henceforth referred to as the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey). 
With over 20,000 individual respondents, this survey represents a significant step forward in our 
understanding of current automation and generative AI use levels for individual occupations, as well 
as the presence of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement and worker attitudes about 
displacement risk. By identifying these characteristics, this work provides powerful insights about the 
types of jobs that are most likely to be displaced through automation technologies in the near future, as 
well as occupations that are more likely to be shielded from displacement.
The data gathered through these efforts will form the foundation of several SHRM publications in the 
near future. This data brief represents the first step along this path and focuses on using data from the 
SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey to estimate the prevalence of “high” (i.e., ≥ 50%) task completion via 
automation and generative AI in U.S. employment, as well as the prevalence of nontechnical barriers to 
automation displacement.
1 For example, in a recent Axios interview, Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei said that emerging AI tools could eliminate half of entry-level 
white-collar jobs and drive the U.S. unemployment rate to as high as 20% within one to five years.
We also ﬁnd that 63.3% of jobs 
include at least one nontechnical 
barrier that would prevent 
automation displacement.
While advances in AI create 
signiﬁcant displacement risk 
for a small fraction of 
workers, we ﬁnd that job 
transformation will be much 
more common.
We estimate that at least 50% of 
tasks are automated in 15.1% of U.S. 
employment (23.2 million jobs).
WORKER
WORK
WORKPLACE
Automation, Generative AI, and Job Displacement Risk in U.S. Employment

3 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
To simplify the language of this brief and provide greater clarity to the reader, the following definitions 
will also be useful:
Automation: The technique of making an 
apparatus, a process, or a system operate 
autonomously (i.e., without human intervention). 
One example would be manufacturing processes 
that complete routinized tasks without human 
input. A task is said to be “automated” if it is 
completed using an automation technology. The 
degree to which an occupation is automated 
depends on the extent to which tasks completed 
within that occupation are done via automation.
Artificial Intelligence (AI): Any technology that can 
independently perform tasks that typically require 
human intelligence. One example would be self-
driving vehicles.
Generative AI: Any AI technology that leverages 
training on an archive of content to generate 
brand-new, unique content (e.g., text, images). 
One example would be ChatGPT, which generates 
entirely novel and unique content based on a 
massive database of existing content that the AI 
has been trained on.
DEFINITIONS
One important challenge when discussing this topic is clearly defining terms. For instance, automated 
processes have become so ubiquitous in day-to-day life that it is sometimes easy to forget that such 
processes often represent critical work tasks. Similarly, AI technologies often show up in subtle ways 
that one may not immediately associate with AI (e.g., improved editing features in word processing 
software). To avoid confusion, we defined the following terms for participants in the SHRM 2025 
Automation/AI Survey:
High Automation Level: We define a job to 
have a high automation level if at least 50% of 
tasks in that job are automated. A central value 
that we estimate in our results is the share of 
employment in a given occupation (or collection 
of occupations) that meets this threshold. For 
example, we estimate that 39.7% of employment 
in the “software developers” occupation 
is highly automated (i.e., ≥ 50% of tasks 
automated).
High Generative AI Use Level: We define a job to 
have a high generative AI use level if at least 50% 
of tasks in that job are completed using generative 
AI. A central value that we estimate in our results 
is the share of employment in a given occupation 
(or collection of occupations) that meets this 
threshold. For example, we estimate that 23.3% 
of employment in the “software developers” 
occupation exhibits high generative AI use 
(i.e., ≥ 50% of tasks completed using generative AI).
Nontechnical Barrier to Automation Displacement: 
A nontechnical barrier to automation displacement 
is any barrier to displacement that does not relate 
to a limitation of the automation technology.
In other words, nontechnical barriers to 
automation displacement can exist even when 
the technology exists to completely automate 
a given job. For example, client preferences for 
interpersonal interaction might present a barrier to 
displacing employment through automation.
U.S. Employment: A central goal of this research 
effort is to estimate the share of U.S. employment 
that meets certain conditions (e.g., highly 
automated, high generative AI use, presence of 
nontechnical barriers to automation displacement). 
In all cases, we measure U.S. employment at the 
occupational level using the May 2024 Bureau of 
Labor Statistics (BLS’) Occupational Employment 
and Wage Statistics (OEWS) employment 
data. These employment figures are available 
in this table and can be downloaded directly 
here. Note that we only use the employment 
values for individual occupations (i.e., “detailed 
occupations”), as these can be aggregated 
to reflect employment levels in larger sets 
(e.g., occupational groups or overall employment). 
For simplicity, the text of this data brief discusses 
U.S. employment in the present tense. 

4 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
METHODS AND DATA 
A detailed review of our methodology and data sources is available in the associated methodological 
appendix. However, a cursory review of our approach is provided here for reference:
The Survey — The SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey was fielded in March and April of 2025, with 
a final sample size of 20,262 U.S. workers. From a demographic point of view, the sample is broadly 
representative of the overall American workforce, though certain groups are slightly overrepresented 
or underrepresented. In addition to providing basic occupational information and demographic 
characteristics, respondents were asked a series of questions related to automation, generative AI use, 
and nontechnical barriers to automation displacement in their current job. This data brief focuses on four 
topics captured in the survey data:
1. The share of tasks currently automated in the respondent’s current job. 
2. The share of tasks currently done using generative AI in the respondent’s current job. 
3. The presence of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement in the respondent’s current job. 
4. If present, the types of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement present in the respondent’s 
current job.
Occupation-Level Estimates — A central priority in the analysis underlying this data brief is to identify the 
following values for each of the 831 occupations in the May 2024 BLS OEWS employment data:
1. The probability that a job in any individual occupation is at least 50% automated. 
 
2. The probability that a job in any individual occupation is at least 50% done using generative AI. 
3. The probability that a job in any individual occupation has at least one nontechnical barrier to 
automation displacement. 
4. The probability that a job in any individual occupation is at least 50% automated and faces no 
definitive nontechnical barriers to automation displacement.
Once calculated, we combine these probabilities with occupation-level May 2024 BLS OEWS 
employment data, which allows us to produce estimates for the share of employment that meets any 
of these conditions, both for individual occupations and for aggregated groups of interest (e.g., overall 
employment and major occupational groups).  
Unfortunately, precisely estimating the probabilities listed above generally requires a significant amount 
of data, so in general, we are unable to rely on direct evidence to estimate these values for each 
individual occupation. Instead, we adopt a “proximity-based” estimation method in which values for any 
given occupation are obtained by combining direct evidence (i.e., survey responses from people in the 
occupation in question) with data from respondents who are in similar occupations. In this approach, all 
final estimates for a given occupation are weighted averages in which respondents whose occupation 
is most similar to the occupation in question receive the most weight. The details underlying these 
calculations are provided in the associated methodological appendix.

5 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
KEY FINDINGS  
1. 15.1% of U.S. employment (23.2 million jobs) is at least 50% automated. 
2. The share of employment that is at least 50% automated varies significantly by industry. 
3. 7.8% of U.S. employment (12 million jobs) is at least 50% done using generative AI. 
4. The share of employment that is at least 50% done using generative AI varies significantly by industry. 
5. A significant majority of employment faces nontechnical barriers to automation displacement. 
6. Among employment with nontechnical barriers to automation displacement, client preferences are the 
most common issue. 
7. 6% of U.S. employment (9.2 million jobs) is at least 50% automated and has no definitive nontechnical 
barriers to automation displacement.

6 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
15.1% OF U.S. EMPLOYMENT (23.2 MILLION JOBS) IS AT LEAST 
50% AUTOMATED
After estimating the share of employment that is at least 50% automated for all 831 detailed 
occupations in the May 2024 BLS OEWS data, we can aggregate those estimates to calculate the 
share of employment meeting the same automation threshold for any subgroup of interest. Figure 1 
does so, both overall and for employment in each of the 22 major civilian occupational groups in the 
Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system.
Overall, we estimate that 15.1% of U.S. employment is at least 50% automated, a share that translates 
to about 23.2 million jobs. However, the estimated share of employment meeting or exceeding this 
automation threshold varies significantly by major occupational group, from a low of 7.3% (education 
and library occupations) to a high of 32% (computer and mathematical occupations). 
Looking at the ranking of occupational groups in Figure 1, some important patterns emerge: First, 
groups that tend to have a large share of highly automated employment tend to emphasize advanced 
software/hardware tools that are becoming increasingly autonomous over time. For example, 
computer and mathematical occupations stand out as being especially transformed by the recent 
emergence of generative AI, and production occupations have become increasingly automated 
through advanced robotics. 
KEY FINDING NO. 1
Share of Employment with At Least 50% of Tasks Automated by Major Occupational Group
FIGURE 1
Computer/Mathematical
Production
Architecture/Engineering
Business/Financial Operations
Life/Physical/Social Science
Management
Installation/Maintenance/Repair
Farming/Fishing/Forestry
All Occupations
Transportation/Material Moving
Office/Admin. Support
Construction/Extraction
Arts/Entertainment
Legal
Building/Grounds Maintenance
Sales
Protective Service
Health Care Support
Community/Social Services
Food Preparation/Serving
Personal Care
Health Care Practitioners
Education/Library
32%
22.8%
21.7%
20.8%
20.7%
19.8%
17%
16.9%
15.1%
14.7%
14.6%
14.5%
14.5%
14.2%
13.3%
13.1%
12.7%
11.4%
11.2%
10.2%
10.1%
9.7%
7.3%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 AI/Automation Displacement Risk Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration),
and employment data from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.

7 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, groups that have low shares of highly automated employment 
tend to strongly emphasize interpersonal skills and/or relatively low-tech tools. For instance, 
interpersonal engagement is fundamental in many education and health care occupations. 
One could interpret the results above as capturing the degree of automation displacement risk in U.S. 
employment, both overall and by occupational group. If interpreted this way, the findings outlined 
above suggest that a relatively large fraction of U.S. jobs face significant risk of displacement through 
automation, since a job that is 50% or more automated already could presumably be fully displaced 
by near-term technological advances and/or a redistribution of nonautomated tasks among workers in 
other occupations. Although this pathway will not be the outcome for every job that currently meets this 
automation threshold, it seems likely that many occupations that are currently highly automated will see 
some workers displaced as more tasks become automatable.
Having said this, there are notable reasons to doubt such a forecast, or at least to believe that it may 
only hold for a narrowly defined set of occupations. For example, it might be that a clear majority of 
the tasks in a given job are already automated, but that all or some of the remaining tasks are both 
nonautomated and require highly skilled human input. A job such as this would probably face limited 
risk of full displacement in the immediate future because the skill requirements associated with some 
or all of the nonautomated tasks make them difficult to redistribute among other workers or automate
through near-term technological advances.
Another reason to doubt that tens of millions of jobs that are highly automated today will shortly be 
displaced by complete automation is that there are likely to be nontechnical barriers that prevent such 
displacement. The SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey explored the prevalence of such barriers directly, 
resulting in several key findings that will be discussed below. In particular, Figure 7 will examine our 
estimates for the prevalence of jobs that are simultaneously highly automated and face no definitive 
nontechnical barriers to automation displacement. As will be discussed, those estimates likely provide a 
more detailed (albeit still imperfect) view of automation displacement risk in U.S. employment. 
KEY FINDING NO. 1

8 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
THE SHARE OF EMPLOYMENT THAT IS AT LEAST 50% 
AUTOMATED VARIES SIGNIFICANTLY BY INDUSTRY
The May 2024 BLS OEWS data also includes tables reporting occupational employment by industry, 
which allows us to aggregate our occupation-level results to produce estimates for the 20 sectors in the 
North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS).²  For simplicity, we will refer to these sectors as 
“industries” henceforth. 
Figure 2 reports these results, which demonstrate that the share of employment that is at least 50% 
automated also varies significantly by industry, from a low of 10.7% (educational services) to a high of 
21.7% (information).³  As one would expect, industries with larger shares of highly automated employment 
are those in which highly automated occupations are very common; conversely, industries with low 
shares of highly automated employment tend to be associated with occupational groups in which highly 
automated jobs are comparatively rare. 
Due to this connection between occupational groups and industries, the takeaways in Figure 2 broadly 
align with those of Figure 1. More specifically, the share of employment that is at least 50% automated 
tends to be high in industries that heavily rely on computer and/or software systems that are becoming 
increasingly sophisticated and autonomous, whereas the share of employment that is at least 50% 
automated tends to be low in industries in which direct interpersonal engagement with clients is 
especially important. 
KEY FINDING NO. 2
Share of Employment with At Least 50% of Tasks Automated by Industrial Sector
FIGURE 2
Information
Manufacturing
Professional/Scientific/Technical
Finance/Insurance
Management of Companies
Utilities
Mining/Quarrying/Oil
Wholesale Trade
Agriculture/Forestry/Fishing
Transportation/Warehousing
Government
Admin. Support/Waste Management
Construction
Real Estate/Rental/Leasing
Total Employment
Other Services
Retail Trade
Arts/Entertainment/Recreation
Health Care/Social Assistance
Accomm./Food Service
Educational Services
21.7%
21%
20.8%
20.4%
20.1%
19.1%
18.4%
16.9%
16.9%
16.1%
15.9%
15.8%
15.5%
15.4%
15.1%
14.7%
12.6%
12.5%
11.6%
10.8%
10.7%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.

9 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
KEY FINDING NO. 2
²In NAICS terminology, a “sector” is the broadest industrial classification, with each sector representing a collection of smaller 
industries that share close ties. In this way, NAICS sectors are analogous to major occupational groups in the SOC system.
³When discussing the prevalence of a particular characteristic (e.g., the share of employment that is at least 50% automated), 
it is generally the case that there is greater variation across occupational groups than across industries, with occupational 
groups exhibiting lower minimums and higher maximums. The reason for this is that industries employ workers across a 
range of different occupational groups; as such, the characteristics of employment within an industry are more diverse which 
tends to mute inter-industry differences in employment characteristics.


10 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
7.8% OF U.S. EMPLOYMENT (12 MILLION JOBS) IS AT LEAST 
50% DONE USING GENERATIVE AI
In addition to asking about the degree to which tasks in their current job are automated, we also asked 
respondents to report the percentage of tasks in their current job that are completed using generative AI. 
Aggregate estimates for the share of employment that is at least 50% completed using generative AI are 
reported in Figure 3, both overall and for major occupational groups.
As one would expect, the overall share of employment that is at least 50% done using generative AI 
is currently very small (7.8% of U.S. employment, or about 12 million jobs). However, given the novelty 
of these tools, it is remarkable that they have attained this level of use in so short a time. Furthermore, 
there is significant variation in this share across occupational groups, from a low of 4.3% (health care 
practitioners) to a high of 19.2% (computer and mathematical occupations).
Five occupational groups stand out as being especially exposed to generative AI (computer and 
mathematical; business and financial operations; architecture and engineering; management; and life, 
physical, and social science occupations), which provides an indication of how generative AI is currently 
used in the workplace. For example, occupations in these five groups tend to place especially strong 
emphasis on gathering and analyzing data to inform decision-making, a series of tasks that many 
KEY FINDING NO. 3
Share of Employment with At Least 50% of Tasks Completed Using Generative AI by Major
Occupational Group
FIGURE 3
Computer/Mathematical
Business/Financial Operations
Architecture/Engineering
Management
Life/Physical/Social Science
Arts/Entertainment
Production
Legal
Construction/Extraction
All Occupations
Farming/Fishing/Forestry
Installation/Maintenance/Repair
Sales
Transportation/Material Moving
Office/Admin. Support
Building/Grounds Maintenance
Community/Social Services
Protective Service
Personal Care
Food Preparation/Serving
Health Care Support
Education/Library
Health Care Practitioners
19.2%
13.1%
12.7%
11.8%
11.8%
8.9%
8.5%
8.4%
8.1%
7 .8%
7.6 %
7.6 %
7%
6.9%
6.7%
6.5%
6.3%
6.2%
5.1%
4.9%
4.8%
4.7%
4.3%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source:
Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.

11 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
generative AI tools are becoming increasingly proficient at. In addition, there are many occupations 
in these groups that historically focused on tasks that are now greatly facilitated by generative AI tools. 
An excellent example is the writing of computer programs, which can now be done much more efficiently 
with the use of certain generative AI tools.
On the other hand, the share of employment whose tasking is at least 50% done using generative AI 
is very low in several occupational groups, including four groups (food preparation and serving; health 
care support; education and library; and health care practitioners) where less than 5% of employment 
meets this threshold. A common theme in all of these groups is the importance of direct interpersonal 
engagement, which likely places a comparatively low upper bound on the share of tasks that can be 
done using generative AI. Relatedly, there may be a general hesitancy to use generative AI tools in some 
of these groups (e.g., health care occupations) due to privacy concerns or other legal issues.
KEY FINDING NO. 3


12 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
THE SHARE OF EMPLOYMENT THAT IS AT LEAST 50% DONE 
USING GENERATIVE AI VARIES SIGNIFICANTLY BY INDUSTRY
We can also estimate the share of employment in which at least 50% of tasks are completed using 
generative AI by industry. The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 4.
As was the case in Figure 3, we find that the prevalence of high generative AI use (i.e., at least 50% 
of tasks completed via generative AI) is generally low and highly variable across industries, ranging 
from a low of 5.2% (accommodation and food service) to a high of 12.8% (information). Four industries 
(information; professional, scientific, and technical services; finance and insurance; and management of 
companies and enterprises) stand out as having comparatively high exposure to generative AI, with the 
major driver being a concentration of employment in occupational groups that are also highly exposed.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, there are five industries in which we estimate the share of 
employment with a high generative AI use level to be below 7.5%: educational services (6.4%), arts, 
entertainment, and recreation (6.2%), retail trade (6%), health care and social assistance (5.5%), and 
accommodation and food service (5.2%). Once again, the central issue in these industries is a high 
concentration of employment in occupational groups where high generative AI use is relatively low.
KEY FINDING NO. 4
Share of Employment with At Least 50% of Tasks Completed Using Generative AI by
Industrial Sector
FIGURE 4
Information
Professional/Scientific/Technical
Finance/Insurance
Management of Companies
Utilities
Mining/Quarrying/Oil
Manufacturing
Wholesale Trade
Government
Construction
Real Estate/Rental/Leasing
Admin. Support/Waste Management
Total Employment
Transportation/Warehousing
Agriculture/Forestry/Fishing
Other Services
Educational Services
Arts/Entertainment/Recreation
Retail Trade
Health Care/Social Assistance
Accomm./Food Service
12.8%
12.2%
11.9%
11.7%
9.7%
9.6%
9.3%
8.8%
8.6%
8.4%
8.1%
7.9%
7.8%
7.8%
7.7%
7.5%
6.4%
6.2%
6%
5.5%
5.2%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.

13 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
A SIGNIFICANT MAJORITY OF EMPLOYMENT FACES 
NONTECHNICAL BARRIERS TO AUTOMATION DISPLACEMENT
After asking respondents about the degree to which their current job is automated and/or completed 
using generative AI, the 2025 SHRM Automation/AI Survey posed the following question:
A significant majority of respondents replied with a definitive “yes,” suggesting that nontechnical 
barriers are — at least from the perspective of workers — very common and might often shield jobs from 
displacement risk.
Overall, we estimate that about 63.3% of U.S. employment has at least one nontechnical barrier to 
automation displacement risk, with our estimates being above 50% for 829 of the 831 individual 
occupations in the BLS OEWS data. In fact, Figure 5 shows that the prevalence of nontechnical barriers to 
automation displacement in employment ranges from 57.4% to 70.6% across major occupational groups, 
further underscoring the idea that these barriers persist across a wide range of skill sets.
KEY FINDING NO. 5
Share of 2024 Employment with Nontechnical Barriers to Automation by Major
Occupational Group
FIGURE 5
Health Care Practitioners
Education/Library
Community/Social Services
Management
Installation/Maintenance/Repair
Business/Financial Operations
Health Care Support
Architecture/Engineering
Legal
Life/Physical/Social Science
Arts/Entertainment
Protective Service
Farming/Fishing/Forestry
Computer/Mathematical
Construction/Extraction
Office/Admin. Support
Personal Care
Transportation/Material Moving
Sales
Production
Building/Grounds Maintenance
Food Preparation/Serving
70.6%
69.9%
69.1%
68.3%
67.4%
66.4%
66.4%
66%
65.9%
65.7%
64.1%
63.5%
62.8%
62.3%
62.1%
61.6%
61.5%
59.7%
59.1%
58.7%
58%
57.4%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.
Assume that a technology existed that could do your current job completely 
autonomously. In such a scenario, do you think that there would still be real-world 
barriers that would prevent your job from being automated?

14 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
Although we estimate that nontechnical barriers to automation displacement exist for a majority of 
employment in every major occupational group, it is clear that certain types of occupations are more
or less likely to have them. In particular, the three occupational groups with the highest prevalence of 
these barriers in Figure 5 (health care practitioners, education and library occupations, and community 
and social service occupations) all stand out as being dominated by occupations in which interpersonal 
engagement and communication are fundamental. For example, patients exhibit an exceptionally strong 
desire to directly engage with human health care providers, a preference that seems unlikely to fade in 
the immediate future.⁴
On the other hand, we find that the prevalence of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement 
appears to be lowest in occupational groups where interpersonal interaction is less essential to 
the ultimate perception of the good or service being provided. For example, a patron at a typical 
restaurant is unlikely to care much about how automated the production of their meal is, even if 
they do value the interpersonal interactions they have with restaurant staff. In fact, our estimates for 
individual occupations within the food preparation and serving group broadly support this conclusion, 
as customer-facing staff (e.g., bartenders) tend to be more likely to have nontechnical barriers to 
displacement than those with little to no customer interaction (e.g., fast food cooks).  Similarly, the 
average consumer buys manufactured goods all the time with little thought paid to how automated the 
production processes for these goods are.
KEY FINDING NO. 5
⁴Riedl et al. (2024) examined hypothetical patient preferences for different combinations of a human doctor and AI 
technology in an online experiment. Their findings reveal nuance in how patients perceive the use of AI technology across 
different medical specialties. However, in all cases, patients exhibited a strong preference for the presence of a human doctor 
(with or without AI technology as an aide) over AI technology alone.


15 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
AMONG EMPLOYMENT WITH NONTECHNICAL BARRIERS TO 
AUTOMATION DISPLACEMENT, CLIENT PREFERENCES ARE 
THE MOST COMMON ISSUE
For survey respondents who definitively reported the presence of at least one nontechnical barrier 
to automation displacement in their current job, we asked a follow-up question about the nature 
of these barriers. In this question, respondents were able to cite multiple barrier types from three 
specific categories (client preferences, legal or regulatory requirements, and cost effectiveness) and 
an “other” category. 
The survey data from this follow-up question was used to estimate how common different types 
of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement are in jobs where such barriers exist, with the 
overall results reported in Figure 6. As the examples provided in the prior section suggest, client 
preferences represent the most widespread barrier of this type, with 73.6% of employment with at 
least one nontechnical barrier to automation displacement having a barrier (or barriers) related to 
client preferences. Legal/regulatory and cost effectiveness barriers are comparatively uncommon,  
but they still appear in a substantial fraction of employment where nontechnical barriers to 
automation displacement risk exist.
KEY FINDING NO. 6
Prevalence of Nontechnical Barrier Types in Employment with Such Barriers
FIGURE 6
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80%
73.6%73.6%73.6%
41.5%41.5%41.5%
36.4%36.4%36.4%
8.8%8.8%8.8%
Client Preferences Legal/Regulatory Barriers Cost Effectiveness Other Barriers
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.

16 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
6% OF U.S. EMPLOYMENT (9.2 MILLION JOBS) IS AT LEAST 
50% AUTOMATED AND HAS NO DEFINITIVE NONTECHNICAL 
BARRIERS TO AUTOMATION DISPLACEMENT
Given that the 2025 SHRM Automation/AI Survey asks respondents about the extent to which 
tasks in their current job are automated and the presence or absence of nontechnical barriers to 
automation displacement, we are able to estimate the share of employment in individual occupations 
that simultaneously meets two conditions:
1. At least 50% of tasks are automated.
2. There are no definitive nontechnical barriers to automation displacement.⁵ 
KEY FINDING NO. 7
Share of Employment with At Least 50% of Tasks Automated and No Definitive
Nontechnical Barriers to Displacement by Major Occupational Group
FIGURE 7
Computer/Mathematical
Production
Architecture/Engineering
Management
Life/Physical/Social Science
Business/Financial Operations
Installation/Maintenance/Repair
Farming/Fishing/Forestry
Office/Admin. Support
Transportation/Material Moving
All Occupations
Construction/Extraction
Building/Grounds Maintenance
Arts/Entertainment
Legal
Sales
Food Preparation/Serving
Protective Service
Community/Social Services
Health Care Support
Personal Care
Health Care Practitioners
Education/Library
12.8%
9.1%
8.3%
7.7%
7.7%
7.2%
6.9%
6.5%
6%
6%
6%
5.8%
5.7%
5.7%
5.5%
5.2%
5%
4.7%
4.4%
4.4%
4.2%
3%
2.6%
AUTOMATION, GENERATIVE AI, AND JOB DISPLACEMENT RISK IN U.S. EMPLOYMENT, SHRM, 2025. VISIT SHRM.ORG/RESEARCH TO LEARN MORE.
Source: Calculations based on data from the SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey, O*NET 29.2 database (U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration), and employment data
from the BLS May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, a product of the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program.
⁵In the original survey question about the presence of nontechnical barriers to automation displacement, respondents may 
answer “Y es,” “No,” or “Don’t know.” We classify a respondent as not having a definitive nontechnical barrier to automation 
displacement in their current job if they reply “No” or “Don’t know.”

17 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
As we discussed when reviewing the findings of Figure 1, meeting the first condition is important 
because it identifies jobs that are plausibly already automated enough to become fully displaced in 
the near future due to relatively minor technological advances and/or through the redistribution of 
nonautomated tasks across other positions. However, we noted that highly automated positions of 
this kind might be shielded from full displacement by nontechnical barriers, and in fact our survey 
data suggests that such barriers are very common (even in highly automated jobs). Therefore, 
jobs that meet both of the conditions listed above plausibly face a significantly elevated level of 
displacement risk.
Figure 7 reports the share of U.S. employment that we estimate meets these two conditions 
by major occupational group. In comparing these findings with those presented in Figure 1, we 
see that imposing the second condition (i.e., the absence of nontechnical barriers to automation 
displacement) dramatically reduces the share of employment that we would identify as facing 
significant displacement risk. Overall, we find that just 6% of U.S. employment is currently at least 
50% automated and has no definitive nontechnical barriers to displacement (roughly 9.2 million jobs), 
despite the fact that 15.1% of employment is estimated to be at least 50% automated.
Although the overall percentage of employment that is simultaneously highly automated and bereft 
of definitive nontechnical barriers to automation displacement is relatively low, we do find that this 
share varies significantly across occupational groups, from a low of 2.6% (education and library 
occupations) to a high of 12.8% (computer and mathematical occupations). Taken together, the results 
reported in Figure 7 tend to support the following conclusions:  
1. At least in the near future, overall exposure to automation displacement risk is relatively low 
in U.S. employment. This does not mean that displacement driven by increasingly advanced 
automation technology won’t occur, just that this displacement will affect a relatively small 
percentage of total employment.  
2. Occupations that face the greatest exposure to automation displacement risk are generally those 
that rely heavily on relatively high-tech inputs to production (e.g., advanced software, robotics). 
The computer and mathematical occupational group stands out in this regard, as we estimate 
that 12.8% of employment in this group is currently at least 50% automated and has no definitive 
nontechnical barriers to displacement.  
3. Conversely, occupations that face the lowest risk tend to place strong emphasis on interpersonal 
interaction or rely on relatively low-tech inputs to production that are unlikely to be altered  
(at least in the near future) by technological change.
KEY FINDING NO. 7

18 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
CONCLUSION
This brief has covered seven key findings stemming from analysis associated with the SHRM 2025
Automation/AI Survey, with a focus on current automation levels, current generative AI use, and 
nontechnical barriers to automation displacement in U.S. employment. Broadly speaking, our findings 
support the conclusion that a notable percentage of U.S. jobs are currently highly (i.e., at least 50%) 
automated, with a smaller (but still significant) share of employment exhibiting high generative AI 
use. Even so, the high automation levels seen in some jobs are a limited indicator of automation 
displacement risk, since nontechnical barriers to displacement are quite common. If we limit our 
attention to employment that is highly automated and lacks nontechnical barriers to displacement, 
we estimate that about 6% of U.S. employment (approximately 9.2 million jobs) meets these conditions. 
This last finding suggests that — at least in the immediate future — the complete displacement 
of workers due to advancing automation technology is likely to be limited as a percentage of 
overall employment and concentrated in specific contexts. However, even in this limited case, total 
displacement due to automation could amount to millions of jobs in total, with some occupational 
groups facing significantly elevated risk. Furthermore, our findings reinforce the conclusion that 
automation and generative AI use are fundamentally important across a wide range of occupations. 
As such, many workers can expect their roles to be transformed as technological advances reshape the 
world of work.
RELATED SHRM RESOURCES
• Jobs at Risk — U.S. Employment in the New Age of Automation (Part I)
• AI & Automation: Real Tips from Real CEOs
• Tailor AI Adoption Strategies to Meet Workforce Needs: Insights from SHRM Thought Leadership
• The New Age of Workforce Planning
• AI, Job Disruption, and Preparing for What’s Next: A Conversation with Futurist Bugge Hansen
• AI’s Disruption of Entry-Level Work: What HR Leaders Need to Know
DATA
SHRM 2025 Automation/AI Survey
O*NET version 29.2. Downloaded from O*NET Resource Center. Data available at onetcenter.org/db_ 
releases.html.
May 2024 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates. BLS Occupational Employment and 
Wage Statistics (OEWS) program. Downloaded from bls.gov/oes/tables.htm.
May 2024 National Industry-Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates. BLS Occupational 
Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program. Downloaded from bls.gov/oes/tables.htm.
O*NET-SOC to Occupational Outlook Handbook Crosswalk. Downloaded from BLS Employment 
Projections Classifications and Crosswalks (bls.gov/emp/documentation/crosswalks.htm).

19 SHRM DATA BRIEF
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
LITERATURE
Arntz, M., Gregory, T., & Zierahn, U. (2016). The Risk of Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries. OECD 
Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, no. 189. https://doi.org/10.1787/5jlz9h56dvq7-en
Ellingrud, K., Sanghvi, S., Singh Dandona, G., Madgavkar, A., Chui, M., White, O., & Hasebe, P. (2023). 
Generative AI and the Future of Work in America. McKinsey Global Institute. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/generative-ai-and-the-future-of-work-in-america
Frey, C., & Osborne, M. (2013). The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to 
Computerisation? Oxford Martin Programme on Technology and Employment. 
https://oms-www.files.svdcdn.com/production/downloads/academic/future-of-employment.pdf
Kessler, S. (2023). The AI Revolution Will Change Work. Nobody Agrees How. The New Y ork Times. 
June 10, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/10/business/ai-jobs-work.html 
Kochhar, R. (2023). Which U.S. Workers Are More Exposed to AI on Their Jobs? Pew Research Center. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2023/07/26/which-u-s-workers-are-more-exposed-to-ai-on-
their-jobs/  
Manyika, J., Chui, M., Miremadi, M., Bughin, J., George, K., Willmott, P., & Dewhurst, M. (2017). A Future 
That Works: Automation, Employment, and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute.
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-for-a-future-that-works
Muro, M., Kinder, M., Liu, S., & de Souza Briggs, X. (2024). Generative AI, the American Worker, and the 
Future of Work. Brookings Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/generative-ai-the-american-
worker-and-the-future-of-work/ 
Muro, M., Maxim, R., & Whiton, J. (2019). Automation and Artificial Intelligence: How Machines Are 
Affecting People and Places. Brookings Institution. ES_2019.01_BrookingsMetro_Automation-AI_
Report_Muro-Maxim-Whiton-FINAL.pdf
Riedl R, Hogeterp SA, & Reuter M. (2024). Do patients prefer a human doctor, artificial intelligence, or a 
blend, and is this preference dependent on medical discipline? Empirical evidence and implications for 
medical practice. Frontiers in Psychology. 2024(15). doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1422177. 
VandeHei, J., & Allen, M. (2025). Behind the Curtain: A White-Collar Blood Bath. Axios. May 28, 2025. 
https://www.axios.com/2025/05/28/ai-jobs-white-collar-unemployment-anthropic

BETTER WORKPLACES, BETTER WORLD.
Our mission is to empower 
people and workplaces 
by advancing HR practices 
and by maximizing human 
potential. Our vision is to 
build a world of work that 
works for all.
OUR PURPOSE IS 
TO ELEVATE HR
BETTER WORKPLACES. BETTER WORLD.
SHRM.ORG