arXiv:2403.07904v3  [cs.CY]  19 Feb 2025
Addressing the Regulatory Gap: Moving
Towards an EU AI Audit Ecosystem Beyond the
AIA by Including Civil Society
David Hartmann 1,2[0000−0001−9745−5287], Jos´ e Renato Laranjeira de
Pereira3,6[0000−0002−9605−8121], Chiara Streitb¨ orger4, and Bettina
Berendt1,2,5[0000−0002−8003−3413]
1 Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin,
Germany
2 Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society, Berlin, Ge rmany
3 Laborat´ orio de Pol ´ ıticas P´ ublicas e Internet - LAPIN, Bras ´ ılia, DF, Brazil
4 Kammergericht Berlin, Berlin, Germany
5 Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
6 Bonn Sustainable AI Lab, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Abstract. The European legislature has proposed the Digital Services
Act (DSA) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act (AIA) to regulate p latforms
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) products. We review to what extent third-
party audits are part of both laws and how is access to informa tion on
models and the data provided. By considering the value of thi rd-party
audits and third-party data access in an audit ecosystem, we identify a
regulatory gap in that the AIA does not provide access to data for re-
searchers and civil society. Our contributions to the liter ature include: (1)
Deﬁning an AI audit ecosystem incorporating compliance and oversight.
(2) Highlighting a regulatory gap within the DSA and AIA regu latory
framework, preventing the establishment of an AI audit ecos ystem that
has eﬀective oversight by civil society and academia. (3) Em phasizing
that third-party audits by research and civil society must b e part of that
ecosystem, we call for AIA amendments and delegated acts to i nclude
data and model access for certain AI products. Furthermore, we call for
the DSA to provide NGOs and investigative journalists with d ata access
to platforms by delegated acts and for adaptions and amendme nts of the
AIA to provide third-party audits and data and model access, at least for
high-risk systems, to at least reduce the regulatory gap tha t exists in the
EU. Regulations modeled after the bloc’s AI regulations sho uld enable
data access and third-party audits, fostering an AI audit ec osystem that
promotes compliance and oversight mechanisms.
Keywords: Auditing, Accountability, Data Access, AI Act, DSA, Black-
box Audits, AI
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies can be found in technologies a nd prod-
ucts such as machine learning (ML)-based automated decision-mak ing (ADM)

2 D. Hartmann et al.
systems, such as social media recommendation systems, and gene ral-purpose
AI, which includes generative AI models. These technologies have be en proven
to cause severe harm to individuals, groups, and society, especially through their
capacity to enable discriminatory practices and for their opaquene ss, such as in
Rotterdam’s welfare fraud, whereby ADM systems deployed were b iased against
immigrants, who were frequently labeled as fraudsters against the system [20].
Scholars have also argued that YouTube’s algorithmic-based recom mender sys-
tems [80] were more prone to recommend extreme content on the p latform,
helping spread disinformation and harmful content. Furthermore , harmful bi-
ases have been uncovered in ML models such as in the generative AI S table
Diﬀusion [65], face recognition APIs [14], and ChatGPT [78].
The European legislature has responded with diﬀerent regulatory a pproaches
to address these risks. For example, it has proposed regulating ve ry large online
platforms 7 (VLOPs) and very large online search engines (VLOSEs) via the
Digital Services Act (DSA) [31], as well as AI-driven products, serv ices, and sys-
tems in the territory of the European Union (EU) via the Artiﬁcial In telligence
Act (AIA) [30].
Among other regulatory tools, both the DSA and the AI Act have pr ovisions
related to systematic evaluations of AI systems – denoted by the t erm audit
– by agents that are both internal or external to the organisatio n developing
or deploying these technologies and which aim at creating public accou ntability
regarding these machine’s behavior [8, 74, 76]. These provisions inclu de self-
assessments both before deployment of the system — as is the cas e in the AI
Act for “high-risk” AI systems which have to undergo a conformity assessment
prior to be place in the EU Market [24] — and after deployment — as ar e the
annual independent audits that VLOPs and VLOSEs have to be subj ected to
under Article 37 of the DSA [19].
It has been argued by M¨ okander et al. [62] that the EU regulation t hereby
sketches a de facto EU-wide ecosystem for auditing AI systems. However, Ed-
wards [24] has argued that self-assessments before deployment and post-market
monitoring – we go with M¨ okander et al. [62] to frame this as a form o f inter-
nal auditing – do not provide suﬃcient oversight. Therefore, Edwa rds [24] has
raised the question of the extent to which audits and assessments by third parties
(regulator, research, and civil society) are necessary for suﬃc ient oversight.
As this paper will demonstrate, access to elements such as the mod el and
training data of the algorithmic system is crucial to facilitate extern al audit-
ing. In this sense, we reiterate and strengthen, on the one hand, the argument
of Casper et al. [16] that third-party black-box access — in which “a uditors
can only query the system and observe its outputs”, as opposed t o “white-box
access to the system’s inner workings” — is insuﬃcient and, on the ot her, Al-
gorithmWatch’s concern that the fact that third-party access is lacking in the
AIA is worrisome for the eﬃcacy of the regulation [4]. Moreover, while the DSA
includes third-party access by vetted researchers, scholars ha ve argued that com-
panies could leverage their market power against external auditor s (i.e. audit
7 Not restricted to AI-driven algorithms

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 3
capture) [50]. This is why we call for extended access for civil societ y and jour-
nalists to strengthen auditors positions and oversight by civil socie ty during the
implementation of both the DSA and for future regulations.
In general, researchers wonder “who will audit internal auditors? ” [3, 22, 24].
Therefore, we analyze whether the DSA and the AIA can create an eﬀective,
diverse EU audit ecosystem that is capable to protect the rights th at they aim
to protect. To do so, we examine the importance of third-party au dits by re-
searchers and civil society. We ﬁnd that third-party audits are es sential for the
establishment of an AI auditing ecosystem in the EU that ensures ac countabil-
ity by compliance and oversight. We argue that the inclusion of such a udits
must be strengthened by considering the existing provisions of the DSA and the
provisions of the AIA, which comes into force in 2024. The question o f how au-
dits conducted by the regulator should be included in an AI auditing ec osystem
unfortunately goes beyond the scope of the paper, although res earchers have
justiﬁably insisted on the importance of this issue (see e.g. [40]).
We contribute to the existing literature concerning third-party au dits in three
ways: (1) We deﬁne an AI audit ecosystem that accounts for comp liance and
oversight. (2) We demonstrate the existence of a regulatory gap as the DSA and
AIA will not lead to a diverse AI audit ecosystem that includes civil soc iety
and, in the case of the AIA, even vetted researchers. (3) We emp hasize that
external audits by vetted, independent research centres, jou rnalists and civil
society organisations have to be part of that ecosystem. For this reason, we argue
that the AI Act has lost an important opportunity to include should in clude
broader access to AI systems, as it is provided in the case of the DS A, and that
this gap should be addressed by future regulation and AIA amendme nts.
First, we introduce the terms related to algorithmic audits and the d iﬀerent
types of audits (section 2). We then analyze the current regulato ry framework
on third-party audits (section 3). The following section addresses third-party
audit case studies and deﬁnes an AI audit ecosystem that ensures compliance
and oversight. Furthermore, we show that third-party audits by researchers and
civil society are vital for an AI audit ecosystem (section 4). Finally, we argue
that the current EU legislation – the DSA and AIA in combination – will no t
be suﬃcient to create a diverse AI audit ecosystem that includes re searchers
and civil society representatives. We then make concrete propos als for future
regulation, as well as for delegated acts and potential amendment s for the DSA
and the AIA (section 5).
2 Algorithm Audits: Terminology and Key Properties
In this section, our primary objective is to establish a robust found ation of
terminology and key attributes inherent to algorithm audits. Conse quently, we
will distinguish audit types, examine the scope of audit types, and un derline
the role of sociotechnical system thinking in audits. These examinat ions are
conducted in preparation for the analysis of the role of third partie s in the DSA

4 D. Hartmann et al.
and AIA. Additionally, we will revisit these audit types in the discussion of
creating a diverse AI audit ecosystem.
The term “audit” 8 is used in various ways. For algorithm audits 9, some (e.g.
Koshiyama et al. [48]) have provided a more technical deﬁnition of an algorithm
audit, which is related to veriﬁcation and compliance, and others (e.g . Sandvig
et al. [82] and Metaxa et al. [59]) have used the term to describe a spe ciﬁc
but still systematic targeted test of a particular aspect of a syst em (e.g., bias),
originating from social science “audit studies.”
Two examples demonstrate the various ways that the term has bee n used.
Firstly, Bandy [8] identiﬁes a research gap in audits of Twitter. Twitt er is the
most researched social media platform due to its formerly openly-a ccessible API
[68]. This suggests a conceptual problem: What diﬀerentiates rese arch on Twitter
from an audit conducted on Twitter? In the second example, Metax a et al. [59]
deﬁnes audits as systematic external evaluations by third parties , serving as a
form of activism with internal knowledge of the process or system b eing studied.
We base our understanding of audits on Raji et al. [76] and Bandy [8 ] by
deﬁning “audit” as an empirical study that investigates algorithmic s ystems
and evaluates performance relative to expected behavior as part of a broader
accountability process. The focus of an audit is to examine for pote ntial prob-
lematic behavior, which refers to system behavior with the potentia l to cause
harm to individuals, groups, or society [8]. “Empirical studies” refer s to quali-
tative and quantitative studies, as system expectations can be ar ticulated and
assessed in either mode [76]. We note that this deﬁnition is also agnost ic to the
time of the audit (before or after the deployment).
In a systematic review of algorithm audits, Bandy [8] points out that racial
discrimination remains a central focus. Thus, Bias audits address a lgorithmic
discrimination based on race and other protected attributes, suc h as age, gen-
der, socioeconomic status, religion, and intersectional identities. However, apart
from representational and allocative harms related to discriminatio n, AI sys-
tems can pose other potential risks. Therefore, audits may need to have diﬀerent
scopes to address quality of service harms, interpersonal harms , and social sys-
tem harms [85]. To address these harm types, audits such as robus tness audits,
interpretability and explainability audits, security audits, and privac y audits can
be conducted [48].
Based on Kak and West [43], the following deﬁnitions are used in this pa per:
– ﬁrst-party audits: internal audits which are conducted within an o rganization
that developed the AI system or product based on speciﬁc metrics , toolkits,
and requirements.
8 Sandvig et al. [82] have noted that “although the word ’audit ’ may evoke ﬁnancial
accounting, the original audit studies were developed by go vernment economists to
detect racial discrimination in housing.” Later, they were introduced in the social
science as ﬁeld experiments to test for discriminatory beha vior [33].
9 In the following, we will use the terms ”audit” and ”algorith m audit” interchange-
ably.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 5
– second-party audits: conducted by contractors with the develo per (audits-
as-a-service), including consulting companies as the “big four,” as w ell as
companies that specialize in audits. While maintaining a degree of indepe n-
dence from deployers, risk “audit washing” (see section 4.3) by pot entially
catering to their clients’ interests.
– third-party audits: are conducted by independent organizations which have
no contractual relationship to the developing organization. Such o rganiza-
tions include independent researchers, journalists, law ﬁrms, reg ulators, civil
society, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), users, and a ﬀected com-
munities.
We adopt the audit design considerations that Raji et al. [76] has de veloped by
analyzing various audit studies to account for the range of possible algorithmic
audits. These considerations include (1) target identiﬁcation and a udit scope; (2)
auditor independence; (3) auditor privileges; (4) auditor profess ionalization and
conduct standards; and (5) when to audit and post-audit actions . Given these
considerations, ﬁve audit types can be distinguished: algorithmic ris k assessment,
conformity assessments, research and civil society audits, regu latory inspection
and certiﬁcation, and sociotechnical audits. The characteristics of these audits
and their assignment to ﬁrst-party, second-party, and third-p arty audits can be
found in Table 1.
Algorithms cannot be divorced from the contexts in which they are a pplied
[97] and represent a complex network containing economic, environ mental, polit-
ical, and social interests and outcomes aﬀecting their functioning. The entangle-
ment of technical components and social elements leads to the typ ical acknowl-
edgment of AI systems as sociotechnical systems 10 [83] And, despite the common
perception of audits as predominantly technical (see e.g. Koshiyam a et al. [48]),
internally conducted impact assessment as well as externally condu cted impact
evaluations and sociotechnical audits encompass a broader spect rum. They eval-
uate the impact of an algorithmic system on a population in a comprehe nsive
framework that encompasses technical elements – most of the tim e limited tech-
nical elements – and include the social elements of the system [2]. We will come
back to the assessment of sociotechnical systems in section 4.4.
Ethics-based or AI safety internal auditing and adversarial audit s by re-
searchers and civil society have a more technical scope and tend t o focus on
speciﬁc harms, e.g. bias audits. Nevertheless, drawing a clear line of demarca-
tion between narrow and broad scope of audit is diﬃcult. While maintain ing a
however central focus on sociotechnical systems, it is essential to consider the
data that substantiate claims concerning speciﬁc harms attribute d to an AI sys-
tem. An example of this diﬃcult distinction is that Stahl et al. [88] includ es bias
mitigation assessments in the systematic review on impact assessme nts, which
10 Due to a broader understanding of their ecological impacts i n recent years, [77]
has added an “ecological” element to this notion, meaning th at AI systems are
socioecological-technical systems. Thus, it may be necess ary to include ecological
harms that AI causes in audits.

6 D. Hartmann et al.
First-party assessments and audits Second- and Third-party assessments and audits
Algorithmic risk
assessment, algo-
rithmic impact
assessment
Ethic-based au-
diting and AI
safety auditing
Internal confor-
mity assessment
and post-market
monitoring
Research and
civil society al-
gorithm audits,
bias audits, ad-
versarial audits
Regulatory in-
spection, external
conformity as-
sessments and
certiﬁcation
Algorithmic im-
pact evaluations,
sociotechnical
audits, ecosystem
audits
Example(s) Case study algo-
rithmic impact
assessment for
data access in
a healthcare
context [37], data
protection im-
pact assessment
[11]
End-to-end
framework for
internal algorith-
mic auditing by
Raji et al. [75]
AIA conformity
assessments, ex-
ample procedure
by [32]; Medical
Device Regula-
tion Application
Procedure [18]
Gender Shades
[14], Audit of
the Rotterdams’
welfare fraud
ADM [20, 21],
Audit Austrian
AMS algorithm
[5]
UK Information
Commissioner’s
Oﬃce’s ‘Guid-
ance on the
AI auditing
framework’[45]
Stanford’s Im-
pact evaluation
of a predictive
risk modeling
tool [35], so-
ciotechnical audit
that assess po-
lice use of facial
recognition[72]
Auditors Creators or com-
missioners of the
algorithmic sys-
tem, contractors
such as consult-
ing companies
Creators or com-
missioners of the
algorithmic sys-
tem, contractors
such as consult-
ing companies
Creators or com-
missioners of the
algorithmic sys-
tem, contractors
such as consult-
ing companies
Researchers,
investigative
journalists, data
scientists, NGOs,
aﬀected commu-
nities, or other
stakeholders
Regulator or
other auditing
and compliance
professionals that
have an institu-
tional role
Researchers,
policymakers,
investigative
journalists, data
scientists, NGOs,
aﬀected commu-
nities, or other
stakeholders
Target Identi-
ﬁcation & Au-
dit Scope
Broad scope:
focus on the risks
and negative
consequences of
the deployment
of an algorithmic
system
Narrow scope:
focus predomi-
nantly on tech-
nical prevention
and uncovering
of speciﬁc harms
(e.g. bias audit,
safety audit)
Broad scope:
focus on an algo-
rithmic system’s
compliance with
regulation and
mostly non-
technical and
process-oriented
Narrow scope:
focus predomi-
nantly on tech-
nical prevention
and uncovering
of speciﬁc harms
(e.g. bias audit)
Broad scope: fo-
cus on an algo-
rithmic system’s
compliance with
regulation
Broad scope:
assessing possible
societal impacts
of an algorithmic
system on the
users or popu-
lation it aﬀects
after it is in use
Auditor Inde-
pendence
Internal and thus
no independence
or contractual de-
pendence
Internal and thus
no independence
or contractual de-
pendence
Internal and thus
no independence
or contractual de-
pendence
External by in-
dependent orga-
nizations with no
obligation
External by inde-
pendent institu-
tion, non-genuine
independence
when auditing
administrative
state-run ADMs
External by in-
dependent orga-
nizations with no
obligation
Auditor
Professional-
ization
Formal: done by
deployers, inter-
nal teams or ac-
credited second-
parties
Formal: Done by
deployers, inter-
nal teams or ac-
credited second-
parties
Formal: done by
deployers, inter-
nal teams or ac-
credited second-
parties
Mostly informal:
accreditation and
cooperation with
company possible
, although basic
access could be
possible without
accreditation
(’right to scrape’)
Formal: Accredi-
tation
Mostly informal:
accreditation
and cooperation
with company
possible (vetted
researchers in
DSA)
When to au-
dit
Before deploy-
ment
Before deploy-
ment
Before deploy-
ment, post-
market monitor-
ing is possible
After deployment After or before
deployment, po-
tentially an ongo-
ing process
After deployment
Table 1. This table is inspired by and derived from [2, 59, 63, 76] and s hould give
an overview of assessments and audits that we surveyed. The c onsiderations of Raji
et al. [76] were used to display the diﬀerences of these asses sment and audit types.
However, this table claims neither completeness nor comple te adequacy, as this topic
is a relatively emerging one with respect to algorithmic sys tems. At the same time,
a systematic presentation of assessments and audits diﬀere nces is not the focus of
this paper, even though we conceptually argue and advocate a broad deployment of
assessments and audits in the AI lifecycle within the AI audi t ecosystem.
we have introduced as ethics-based audits or bias audits. Thus, th ese kind of
audits could potentially be part of an impact assessment.
Conformity assessments [62] and regulatory inspection [2] are sys tematic tests
that evaluate if a system is compliant with a speciﬁcation, standards , or a reg-

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 7
ulation. Regulatory inspections – conducted by an independent sta te-run body
– are external to the deploying organization. Conformity assessm ents can be in-
ternal or external. In contrast to third-party audits, conform ity assessments aim
to achieve compliance, while third-party audits by researchers and civil society
aim to prevent potential harm or uncover it by systematically evalua ting the
systems and checking the documents.
The vast number of actors and contexts in which AI systems funct ion pro-
duces multiple complexities for their auditing, and this has aﬀected th e precision
of related legal provisions. This applies especially when we try to answ er ques-
tions such as, “What are we auditing for? Which harms count, and ho w are
they deﬁned?” [43]. This situation shapes the information we need to assess the
system’s compatibility with a legal regime or ethical parameter, cons idering the
contextual character of transparency and access to informat ion [6].
We focus on third-party audits, especially those by researchers, academics,
and journalists, as well as broader sociotechnical audits. 11 Such audits are char-
acterized by being conducted post-deployment through systema tic evaluations
– mostly a combination of diﬀerent qualitative and quantitative metho ds – and
reverse engineering of system behaviour, typically with little data an d model
access and independent of the organization deploying the algorithm [12, 22, 59].
Thus, they have no formal contractual relationship with the audit target [73].
In recent years, there has been increasing public and academic con cern about
the inﬂuence of social media on public discourse, democratic proces ses, and insti-
tutions [7, 71]. Over the years, researchers have encountered signiﬁcant challenges
when attempting to access online platforms’ data for the purpose of studying
their operations, potential risks, and impacts [67, 68]. Moreover , access to AI
technologies beyond ML-driven social media recommendation syste ms, such as
ADMs or general-purpose AI, presents a signiﬁcant challenge [43]. S cientists and
civil society are dependent on the voluntary granting of access, a nd sometimes
only process access is granted, i.e. access to documentation (e.g A llhutter et al.
[5]). Are we repeating the same mistake by granting large companies u nwarranted
authority without enabling civil society to thoroughly examine and un derstand
their products for potential harm?
In response to these challenges, the DSA and the AIA have introdu ced dis-
tinct frameworks for audits, third-party audits and access to th ese technologies
by research and civil society. In the following section, we will introdu ce and ex-
plore both of these frameworks, shedding light on how they addres s (third-party)
audits of platforms and AI products.
3 The Regulatory Framework Based on the DSA and
AIA on Third-Party Audits and Data Access
The objective of this chapter is to comprehend the regulations of t hird-party
audits and third-party data and model access by the DSA and AIA. We will
11 These broader types of audits are also referred to as “ecosys tem audits” by Birhane
et al. [12].

8 D. Hartmann et al.
begin by examining the DSA’s provisions on audits and data access (se ction
3.1). Then, we will do the same for the AIA based on the Corrigendum made
public by the European Parliament (section 3.2).
3.1 Digital Services Act
The DSA aims to create a harmonized legal framework that is applicab le to all
online intermediary services provided in the EU. The regulation helps p romote
a safer digital space by regulating the distribution of (illegal) conten t. To in-
crease accountability to the public, the regulation includes a number of speciﬁc
obligations for providers of VLOPs and VLOSEs [26], including provision s such
as speciﬁc transparency obligations on content moderation or the creation and
publication of reports on risk assessments and mitigation procedur es.
The Regulations on Independent Auditing in the DSA, Art. 37 D SA
In order to ensure compliance with the DSA, a “novel institutional e cosystem”
[50] will be established that involves independent third parties in an ad ditional
oversight role.12 [31] Therefore, the oﬃcially published version of the DSA asserts
that VLOPs and VLOSEs are legally required to undergo an independe nt audit
at least once a year (“independent audit”) 13 The purpose of auditing is to de-
termine whether the providers are following the obligations standar dized by the
DSA.14 This is an important regulatory requirement, as it increases provide rs’
accountability and enables regulators and the public to understand and regulate
how VLOPs and VLOSEs moderate content. The Commission is empowe red
to implement the requirements of Art. 37 DSA by legislative act. It ha s pub-
lished a ﬁrst draft of a regulation to specify the requirements for in dependent
audits (hereinafter referred to as the Delegated Regulation on ind ependent au-
dits) [27]. The introduction of such guidelines is welcome as it will provide legal
certainty for both audit ﬁrms and VLOPs and VLOSEs by providing gu idance
that can improve transparency and accountability. An important a udit tool is
the preparation of an audit report, which should comply with a compr ehensive
set of obligations. The audit ﬁrm must describe the speciﬁc elements audited
and the methodology used. 15 It must also provide a description and summary of
the main audit ﬁndings. 16 In addition, an outcome statement must be given as
to whether the audited provider has complied with the obligations and commit-
ments referred to above. 17 The audit statement shall state the result, which can
12 Cf. Recital No. 92 DSA.
13 Art. 37 (1) DSA.
14 It means the obligations set out in Chapter III (Art. 11-48 DS A), in particular the
obligations arising from codes of conduct referred to in Art . 45 and 46 DSA and the
crisis protocols referred to in Art. 48 DSA.
15 Art. 37 (4)(2d) DSA.
16 Art. 37 (4)(2e) DSA.
17 Art. 37 (4)(2g) DSA.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 9
be “positive” 18, “positive with comments” 19 or “negative” 20 In the case of a
negative remark, the audit ﬁrm must make operational recommend ations to be
implemented within a recommended period of time to achieve compliance .21 If
the audit company cannot conduct the auditing at all or can only do s o partially,
this should be clariﬁed. 22 In such cases the Delegated Regulation on independent
audits could specify how the systematic assessment of risks must b e conducted.
It should also specify the factors to be taken into account in the ris k analysis. 23
According to the current draft, the inherent risks 24, the control risk 25, and the
detection risks 26 should be accounted for in the audit companies’ analysis. 27
Providers should provide the necessary cooperation and assistan ce to organiza-
tions conducting audits under this obligation so that they can under take their
work in an eﬀective, eﬃcient, and timely manner. 28 They must, for example,
grant access to all relevant data and premises. This includes the dis closure of
data relating to algorithmic systems and answering written or oral q uestions.29
The platform provider must then consider improvement suggestion s and take
18 “Positive” means, where the auditing organisation conclud es with a reasonable level
of assurance that the audited provider has complied with an a udited obligation or
commitment, Art. 8 (1)(a) Delegated Regulation on Independ ent Audits [27].
19 “Positive with comments” means, where the auditing organis ation concludes with
a reasonable level of assurance that the audited provider ha s complied with an au-
dited obligation or commitment, Art. 8 (1)(b) Delegated Reg ulation on Independent
Audits.
20 “Negative” means, where the auditing organisation conclud es with a reasonable level
of assurance that the audited provider has not complied with an audited obligation
or commitment, Art. 8 (1)(c) Delegated Regulation on Indepe ndent Audits.
21 Art. 37 (4)(2h) DSA
22 Art. 37 (5) DSA.
23 Cf. Art. 9 (4) Delegated Regulation on independent audits.
24 “Inherent risks” means the risk of non-compliance intrinsi cally related to the nature,
the activity and the use of the audited service, as well as the context in which
it operates, and the risk of non-compliance related to the na ture of the audited
obligation or commitment, Art. 2 (10) Delegated Regulation on Independent Audits.
25 “Control risks” means the risk that a misstatement is not pre vented, detected and
corrected in a timely manner by means of the audited provider ’s internal controls,
Art. 2 (11) Delegated Regulation on Independent Audits
26 “Detection risk” means the threshold beyond which deviatio ns or misstatements
by the audited provider, individually or aggregated, would reasonably aﬀect the
audit ﬁndings, conclusions and statements, Art. 2 (12) Dele gated Regulation on
Independent Audits.
27 Art. 9 (3) Delegated Regulation on Independent Audits.
28 Art. 37 (2)(1) DSA.
29 Cf. Recital No. 92 DSA. In addition to this, the Delegated Reg ulation on independent
audits could regulate which information the providers have to provide to the audit
organisations, Art. 5 (1) Delegated Regulation on Independ ent Audits. The provider
and the audit organisation must necessarily agree on condit ions - i.e. meaning duties
and obligations - that are listed in the current draft to carr y out the audit, Art. 7
(1)(a) Delegated Regulation on Independent Audits.

10 D. Hartmann et al.
action to enforce the recommendations within one month. 30 If the operational
recommendations are not implemented, the VLOP or VLOSE provider must
justify and specify alternative measures that will be taken to ﬁx th e identiﬁed
cases of non-compliance. 31
The Requirements for Audit Firms under the DSA The auditors should
have no conﬂicts of interest with the provider. 32 Furthermore, they must have
proven expertise in risk management as well as technical competen ce and capa-
bility. 33 Providers are allowed to choose the audit ﬁrms themselves. Howeve r,
it is important to note that the DSA introduced a rotation model acc ording to
which the audit ﬁrms may only work for the providers if they have not performed
an audit pursuant to Art. 37 DSA for a period of more than ten cons ecutive
years.34
Data Access for V etted Researchers, Art. 40 DSA Art. 40 DSA regu-
lates access to the data of VLOPs and VLOSEs for “vetted resear chers.” The
norm contains not only the obligation of providers to grant access, but also the
right of researchers to access. 35 Researchers must make their research results
publicly available free of charge 36. The results can thus be made available to
the authorities, the Commission and the public. Classiﬁcation as an ap proved
researcher is subject to strict conditions. In particular, resear chers must be aﬃl-
iated to a research institution 37. It means a university, including its libraries, a
research institute or any other entity, the primary goal of which is to conduct sci-
entiﬁc research or to carry out educational activities involving also the conduct
of scientiﬁc research. 38 Like the audit ﬁrms, the researchers and the institutions
to which they belong must be independent of commercial interests 39. Another
condition for access is that the data collection is necessary and pro portionate
for the creation of the data work. 40 The classiﬁcation as vetted researcher is
granted to the researcher only in relation to the intended researc h project. The
30 Art. 37 (6)(2) DSA.
31 Art. 37 (6)(3) DSA.
32 Art. 37 (3a) DSA. In this respect, the European legislator cl ariﬁes that audit ﬁrms
are organizationally independent from the interests of the provider and constitute
an external audit structure. The additions were explicitly included to address con-
cerns that audit ﬁrms are dependent on platform providers fo r auditing. Cf. critical
comments on the preliminary draft [15].
33 Art. 37 (3b) DSA. This requires that they must have the necess ary knowledge in
the ﬁeld of risk management as well as the technical expertis e to test algorithms, cf.
Recital No. 92 DSA.
34 Cf. Art. 37 (3a)(ii) DSA.
35 E. g. [42] and [98]
36 Art. 40 (8)(1g) DSA.
37 Art. 40 (8)(1a) DSA.
38 Art. 2 (1) Directive (EU) 2019/790.
39 Art. 40 (8)(1b) DSA.
40 Art. 40 (8)(1e) DSA. Cf. Recital 97.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 11
research must relate to systemic risks and contribute to their iden tiﬁcation and
understanding.41
3.2 The Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act
The AIA [25, 29] aims to regulate and harmonise the marketing, comm issioning
and use of AI systems within the European Union. To this end, safe a nd trust-
worthy AI is to be created by observing the fundamental values pr otected in the
European Union, that is material and ethical values, during develop ment and
use. For this reason, companies 42 should be subject to a far-reaching catalogue
of obligations and ensure quality assurance throughout the entire AI value chain.
The Regulations on the Conformity Assessment Procedure The AIA
only regulates conformity assessment requirements for high-risk AI systems. For
this purpose, the AIA deﬁnes “conformity assessment” as “the p rocess of demon-
strating whether the requirements [...] to a high-risk AI system have been ful-
ﬁlled.”43 The aim is thus to promote the accountability of AI providers. On the
one hand, a so-called “embedded” AI system 44 is subject to conformity assess-
ment by third parties. AI systems are already subject to other pr oduct safety
regulations; the conformity assessments are carried out in accor dance with these
diﬀerent European regulations. 45 In this case, however, the provider of the
AI system must take into account some of the procedural require ments of the
AIA.46 As these AI systems are already subject to detailed safety requir ements,
which are assessed under a public authorisation procedure, the AI A is intended
to complement these requirements. 47 For so-called stand-alone AI systems 48,
the conformity assessment must generally be carried out internally , i.e. by the
providers themselves. With regard to these systems, it is explicitly s tated that
the involvement of a so-called notiﬁed body is not necessary for the assessment.49
Due to the complexity of these AI systems and the involved risks, th e legislator
assumes that the suppliers are best placed to evaluate them. This a lso means
41 Art. 40 (4) and (8f) DSA.
42 The regulation is addressed to all companies that place AI sy stems on the market
or put them into operation in the European Union, cf. Art. 2 (1 ) AIA [25, 29]. In
practice, this will include software developers, AI import ers and distributors, but
also, for example, government authorities.
43 Art. 3 (20) AIA.
44 Art. 6 (1) AIA and Annex I. These are, for example, products fo r machines, medical
devices, automobiles and aircraft, Rec. (50) AIA.
45 Art. 43 (3)(1) AIA. Cf. Rec. (49),(51) AIA.
46 Art. 43 (3) AIA.
47 The regulation of the systems is based on the legal provision s of the New Legislative
Framework. This means that the product safety requirements for a system should be
based on an EU Directive, with the standardisation organisa tions CEN, CENELEC
and ETSI providing more speciﬁc details.
48 Art. 6 (2) AIA and Annex III.
49 Art. 43 (2) AIA.

12 D. Hartmann et al.
that audits that potentially are part of such a conformity assessm ent can be
conducted internally, thus implying ﬁrst-party auditing. However, this does not
apply to AI systems that are used as ”remote biometric identiﬁcatio n systems”
(Annex III No. 1(a) AIA.). For these, it is optional whether the co nformity
assessment is carried out by the provider himself or by a notiﬁed bod y.50 Fur-
thermore, the conformity assessment by external bodies is mand atory for a few
cases, e.g. when the AI system is put into operation by law enforcem ent or immi-
gration authorities or by institutions, bodies, oﬃces or agencies of the Union. 51
Another requirement for speciﬁc ’high-risk’ AI systems 52 is the execution of a
fundamental rights impact assessment, however, also conducte d by the deployers
similar and an extension to data protection impact assessments [91 ].
The Requirements for Audit Firms under the AIA A ’notiﬁed body’
is deﬁned in the AIA as “a conformity assessment body notiﬁed in acc ordance
with this Regulation and other relevant Union harmonisation legislation .”53 The
procedure for their designation sets out requirements for their ( professional)
qualiﬁcations as well as their independence and objectivity. As in the DSA, the
AIA also clariﬁes that notiﬁed bodies should be independent of the pr ovider
of the high-risk system. This includes both economic aspects, e.g. n o competi-
tive relationship between the provider of the AI system and the not iﬁed body,
and personnel aspects, e.g. no connection between the managem ent and the AI
development project. 54 In order to ensure technical competence, they have to
note speciﬁc organisational, quality management, personnel and p rocedural re-
quirements.55 To this end, notiﬁed bodies should have procedures in place to
guide their activities, taking into account the size of an undertaking , the sec-
tor in which it operates its structure, and the degree of complexity of the AI
system concerned. 56 In addition, it should be noted that the conformity assess-
ment procedure for AI systems, that will be used by certain autho rities and
related bodies (e.g. law enforcement, immigration or asylum authorit ies or EU
bodies) is carried out by the market surveillance authority. 57 Unlike the DSA,
the AIA ensures the cooperation between the developer, the not iﬁed body, and
the notifying authority. The authority is enforced to certify the b odies. In ad-
50 Art. 43 (1) AIA.
51 Cf. Art. 43(1), (2) AIA. For general purpose AI systems, cf. R ec. (161) AIA.
52 Cf. Art 27 (1) AIA. Mandatory for high-risk AI system as descr ibed in Article 6(2),
with the exception of those intended for use in the areas list ed in point 2 of Annex
III, deployers that are bodies governed by public law, or are private entities providing
public services, and deployers of high-risk AI systems refe rred to in points 5 (b) and
(c) of Annex III.
53 Art. 3 (1)(22) AIA. For the term ’conformity assessment body ’, see Art. 3 (1)(21).
Cf. for the term ’notifying authority’ Art. 3 (19) and Art. 28 (1) AIA. For the duties
of the notifying authority, cf. Art. 3 (19) and 28-30 AIA.
54 Art. 31(4) and (5) AIA.
55 Art. 31(2), (3), (10) and Rec. (126) AIA.
56 Cf. 31(8) AIA.
57 Cf. Art. 43(1) AIA.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 13
dition, the certiﬁcated bodies are accountable to the notifying aut horities. To
qualify as a notiﬁed body under the AIA, the potential audit ﬁrm mus t fulﬁll
several requirements: The notiﬁcation application must be accomp anied by com-
prehensive information, such as the conformity assessment activ ities, conformity
assessment modules, and AI technologies for which the conformity assessment
body claims competence, as well as - if available - an accreditation cer tiﬁcate.58
The provider shall ensure that the conformity assessment proce ss takes place. 59
An audit should also be carried out if the AI system has already under gone a
conformity assessment procedure, but a signiﬁcant change has b een made to the
system.60 In any case, they are obliged to document the assessment in order to
provide evidence that the conformity assessment has been carrie d out properly.61
The requirements for the conformity assessments by internal co ntrols are set out
in Annex VI. It consists of the establishment and monitoring of the r elevant
quality management system, 62 as well as the control of the obligations imposed
on the suppliers regarding the technical documentation. 63 The providers of the
AI system should assist the testing organisations in their investigat ions, e.g. by
making available the technical documentation that provides all the in formation
necessary to assess whether the AI system meets these require ments.64 Providers
must give them full access to the training and test data sets used. This includes
application programming interfaces and other means and tools suita ble for re-
mote access. 65 For example, the audit ﬁrm may, upon request, be given access
to the AI system’s training models and trained models, including the re levant
parameters, and should be able to test the AI system independent ly.66 For this
reason, it is appropriate for the notiﬁed body to maintain the conﬁd entiality
of the information provided. 67 If the notiﬁed body can conﬁrm the conformity
of the high-risk system, a certiﬁcate - similar to the audit statemen t under the
DSA - is issued. 68 This certiﬁcate is valid for up to ﬁve years or is revoked or
restricted if the AI system subsequently fails to comply with the req uirements
of the AIA. 69 In order to adapt the legal framework, the Commission is empow-
ered to adopt instruments amending the provisions on conformity a ssessment
procedures.70
58 Cf. Art. 29 (2)(3) AIA.
59 Cf. Art. 6(f) AIA.
60 Cf. Art. 43(4) AIA, for the deﬁnition in Art. 3(15) AIA.
61 Art. 18 (1)(g), Art. 22 (3)(b) AIA.
62 Annex VI No. 2, No. 4 AIA
63 Annex VI No. 3 AIA
64 Cf. Rec. (86) AIA.
65 Annex VII No. 4.3 AIA.
66 Annex VII No. 4.4 and 4.5 AIA.
67 Cf. Art. 31(7) and Art. 78 AIA.
68 Art. 44(1) and (2) AIA.
69 Art. 44(3) AIA
70 Art. 43(6) and Art. 97, Rec. (173) AIA.

14 D. Hartmann et al.
No Data Access for V etted Researchers The AIA does not contain a
regulation comparable to Art. 40 DSA. This is surprising, as the regu lation
aims to ensure that relevant entities, such as digital innovation hub s, testing
experimentation facilities and researchers, should be able to acces s and use high
quality datasets within their respective ﬁelds of activities for the de velopment
and assessment of high-risk AI systems. 71 The European data space created
by the AIA and the facilitated exchange of data should also provide t rustful,
accountable and non-discriminatory access to high quality data for the training,
validation and testing of AI systems. 72
4 Creating a Diverse AI Audit Ecosystem for
Accountability by Involving Research and Civil Society
In this section, we describe an AI audit ecosystem that ensures tw o key account-
ability components. For that, we draw on a deﬁnition of accountabilit y in the
AI context. We look at three aspects which demonstrate why inter nal audits are
not suﬃcient to create an audit ecosystem. In three additional as pects, we point
out why third-party audits are valuable for an AI audit ecosystem . This will be
the blueprint under which we will explore whether the analyzed EU legis lation
can create an AI audit ecosystem.
4.1 Third-Party Audits by Researchers and Civil Society
Buolamwini and Gebru [14], Larson et al. [49], Nicoletti and Bass [65], Rib eiro
et al. [80], Sweeney [89] are some examples of algorithm audits in the Un ited
States that have uncovered problematic algorithmic behavior or alg orithm im-
pacts that could potentially cause harm. Regarding algorithmic audit s in the EU,
audits of the Austrian AMS algorithm [5], and Rotterdam’s welfare fr aud algo-
rithm by the Wire [20], come to mind. These audits were third-party au dits, that
is, audits by independent, external parties combining independent researchers,
civil society, regulators, journalists, and other stakeholders. T hey were respon-
sible for uncovering deeply-rooted sociotechnical harms in algorith mic systems
related mainly to representational harms due to discriminatory des ign choices.
As a result, they showed the extent of the potential harms broug ht by AI sys-
tems’ biases.
With respect to social media platforms, third-party audits uncove red social
system harms due to the propagation of disinformation on social me dia, hate
speech increase on Twitter [41] and uncovered bias with respect to right-winged
content recommendation on YouTube [80]. It has to be noted that third-party
audits by researchers and civil society are not conventionally cons idered audits
per se due to their narrow target speciﬁcation [76], but they have repeatedly
shown their signiﬁcance. Our argument, therefore, favors their integration in an
AI audit ecosystem.
71 Rec. (68) AIA.
72 Recital No. 45 AIA.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 15
Third-party audits aim for a material change in the situation (e.g., a p roduct
update, policy change, or recall) to minimize the harm experienced by those they
represent [73]. In contrast, ﬁrst- and second-party audits tha t seek to validate
procedural expectations, aim to minimize liability and solely test for co mpliance
to AI principles and legal constraints [73]. Despite the important ove rsight of
third-party audits in platform research and algorithmic systems, it has been dif-
ﬁcult for them to audit these models formally and legally. Until now, ev aluations
are usually done through the application developers’ voluntary pub lic disclosures
of possibly incomplete transparency reports or by voluntarily prov iding certain
data access through an API [3].
Third-Party Platform Data Access Olteanu et al. [68] reports four obsta-
cles with systematic platform research through third parties: (1) Many social
platforms discourage data collection by third parties as some platfo rms such as
Facebook block their API for researchers and other platforms th at block scrapers.
Additionally, there is a shift toward APIs of major platforms and pro ducts being
closed, a scenario described as the “post-API scenario” [93]. This le ads to more
open-source products or products being audited by third parties by deployers,
who are probably more concerned about the compliance of their pro ducts. This
leads ultimately to an imbalance in oversight [76]. (2) Even API access c omes
with limitations as they limit the quantity of data, increase the monthly costs
and provide only query languages with limited expressiveness. (3) Ad ditionally,
these platforms may not give access to all data as they safeguard privacy-related
content although the platforms could anonymize them. (4) Finally, t he platform
may revoke access every time.
For example, access for researchers has changed recently for t he Twitter API
[69] and the Reddit API, as both have raised the costs for third-pa rty API access
[79]. Nevertheless, attempts by third parties such as NGOs, resea rch and inves-
tigative journalists to expose these accountability concerns by da ta donations or
scraping are thwarted by companies. For example, the NGO Algorith mWatch
was prevented to conduct an audit of the Instagram algorithm via d ata do-
nations. Facebook sued them for disregarding the terms of servic e [44]. Data
donations are only necessary because the APIs for limited ’black-bo x’ access
have been shut down or made considerably more expensive by many p latforms
and services [69, 79, 93].
The DSA will provide data access for vetted researchers. Howeve r, as demon-
strated vetted researchers may not include NGOs and investigativ e journalists,
although many of the case studies mentioned were conducted by ne wspapers
and were accompanied by NGOs that were able to contribute with the ir domain
knowledge to potential harms. We will discuss reasons for this being critical
later.
Third-Party ADM and ML-Model Access It appears to be just as chal-
lenging with ADMs and ML-driven products. Many of the products do not have
access for researchers and regulatory audits. Therefore, mos tly commercial APIs

16 D. Hartmann et al.
have to be used as in the Gender Shades case [14]. If there is no API , the data
can only be scraped, which is mostly illegal or prevented by other mea ns. US
Researchers are currently campaigning against the use of anti-ha cking laws in
the US that prevent audit studies by scraping. At the same time, ac cording to
Raji et al. [76], companies continue to seek to prevent audits by (1) paywalls,
(2) prohibition laws through terms of services, and (3) structurin g the product
to obscure any clear set of test points. Raji et al. [76] describes it as an extraor-
dinary eﬀort for researchers, NGOs, investigative journalists to gain access and
knowledge of ML and ADM systems.
It was shown that the AIA does not encompass data or model acce ss provi-
sions for third parties, even in the context of high-risk systems. N onetheless, in
the subsequent discussion, we will explore the potential access lev els and, con-
sequently, the knowledge accessible to third parties concerning AI technologies.
Based on these ﬁndings, we will determine to what extent it is possible to make
statements about a system even with limited access.
T echnical Methods and Access Levels Third-party audit methods [8, 60,
82, 90] – such as code audits, user audits, automated audits (inclu ding scraping
audits, sock puppet audits and API audits), document audits, cro wdsourced
audits, and experimental audits [90] – contribute various approa ches to auditing
platforms and AI systems. Whether social media platform, ADM or M L model
audits, the methods for third-party audits are similar.
Document audits are often broad sets of information that can be a nalysed in
diﬀerent ways [60] and ensure the possiblity for third-party impact evaluations
or conformity assessments as intended by the AIA. However, only process-based
compliance is feasible through document audits, there are no stand ards for most
of these reports and they are impossible to verify if no other data a ccess is
provided [60].
Code audits entail direct access to a system’s code and involve the d ynamic
execution of code with various inputs to observe corresponding ou tput behaviors
[90]. While they are suitable for some audits, code audits might not be id eal for
AI product audits because of the need for training data. Further more, potential
complexities in reverse engineering system behavior - especially for d ynamically
trained algorithms such as recommender systems - hamper code au dits’ feasibil-
ity.
Scraping audits, on the other hand, lack randomization and interve ntions.
This limits their utility primarily to descriptive tasks [8]. They additionally la ck
personalization for speciﬁc user accounts [60]. Furthermore, scr aping and sock
puppet audits often violate terms of services of platforms [60]. API access limi-
tations were already discussed.
Experimental audits involve the change of the algorithm and can the reby
establish causal evidence since interventions are feasible [33]. How ever, full access
to the system is necessary for experimental audits, and experime nts with social
platforms such as Facebook on emotional contagion exhibit ethical diﬃculties
[84].

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 17
Crowdsourced audits, including data donations, have two major ad vantages:
They include users in the audit, and they transfer parts of the tra ining data
so that more statements are possible. However, in the past, large platforms
or companies have prevented such crowdsourcing audits as in the c ase of Algo-
rithmWatch. Recognizing the inherent advantages and limitations ac ross various
audit types, a comprehensive analysis of these factors would exte nd beyond the
scope of this article 73. Consequently, our focus is conﬁned to examining access
to AI systems.
Technical access and the knowledge of a system can be categorize d on a
continuum from “white-box” to “black-box” and is related to these audit types.
Koshiyama et al. [48] have deﬁned seven levels of auditing access tha t range from
“process-access,” where only indirect observation of a system is p ossible, and
the system’s behavior in a sociotechnical system must be reverse- engineered, to
“white-box,” where details of the encompassing model are disclosed . The latter
is usually not applicable to third-party audits, as it would conceal all in formation
about the model, which could have security, privacy, and trade sec ret issues [48].
Thus, Koshiyama et al. [48] have described an “information concea led versus
feedback detail trade-oﬀ.”
Table 2 shows diﬀerent access levels that Koshiyama et al. [48] have proposed
for ML algorithm audits. We matched them with third-party evaluatio n tools,
feasible audit types, and case study third-party audits. This repr esentation is a
simpliﬁcation because platforms and general-purpose AI consist of several models
that interact with each other and ADMs can consist of several mod els and a
complex decision function. Nevertheless, the presentation is usef ul to show three
aspects. First, with more access, more knowledge about a system is possible
and more audit types are available. Second, there is a trade-oﬀ bet ween trade
secrets and model access. Third, case study third-party audits in the past that
had only ’black-box’ access - mostly through an API, scraping, or s ock puppets
- demonstrate that low-level access can contribute to accounta bility.
Some audits, such as the Austrian AMS algorithm relied solely on proce ss
access. The prediction model has not been made public [5]. Generally , releas-
ing personal data relating to ADMs would obviously be dangerous. In this case,
anonymization methods would have to be used to release the data fo r scien-
tiﬁc purposes like it is planned by the DSA. These document audits hav e little
expressiveness as they have to reverse engineer the whole syste m’s functioning
without the knowledge or veriﬁcation that the documents are actu ally accurate.
Others with at least ’black-box’ access could provide more informat ion.
For example, Bloomberg’s stable diﬀusion audit [65], or in YouTube’s rad i-
calization audit [80], the prediction model was accessed via the API. T hus, prob-
lematic behaviour like biases could already be shown in both cases. The original
Gender Shades study as well operated within the constraints of ac cessing their
audit targets via a commercial API, mirroring the actions of a user w ithin these
platforms and thus using a socket puppet [74]. Others had even mo re access. In
73 For a comprehensive analysis of connections between audit t ypes and recommender
system elements see [60].

18 D. Hartmann et al.
What is accessed Tools and possible evalua-
tions
Feasible audit types Case study third-
party audit(s)
Process
access
Frameworks, check-
lists, model Cards,
datasheets, method
paper, technical
reports
Checklists for explainability,
robustness, fairness and pri-
vacy
Document audits (al-
gorithmic risk assess-
ment and algorithmic
impact evaluations)
Audit Austrian AMS
algorithm[5]
Model
access
(’black-
box’)
Access to the predic-
tor model f (·) using
artiﬁcial data x∗
Feature relevance plots, par-
tial dependency plots, ad-
versarial attacks, adversar-
ial fairness, statistical disclo-
sure
Scraping, API, sock
puppet audit and
code Audit
Bloomberg stable
diﬀusion audit[65],
discrimination in
online ad delivery,
[89], auditing radi-
calization pathways
on YouTube [80]
Input ac-
cess
Access to the predic-
tor model f (·) and
training data x to
predict f (x)
Surrogate explanations, syn-
thetic data, bias in outcome
Crowdsourced Au-
dit74, API audit with
training data
Cooperative audit
of pymetrics’ can-
didate screening
software[100]
Outcome
access
(’grey-
box’)
Access to the predic-
tor model f (·), train-
ing data x to predict
f (x) = ˆy and the ac-
tual outcome y
Accuracy of explanations,
concept drift analysis, bias
in opportunity, inversion at-
tacks
API audit with train-
ing data and history
of actual outcomes
ProRepublicas inves-
tigation of North-
pointe’s recidivism
risk scoring system
[49]
Parameter
control
and learn-
ing goal
access
Learning procedure
and target L, param-
eters φ, L(fφ(x)) can
be retrained
Stability of explanations,
stability analysis, stability
of bias metrics, function-
ality stealing, model com-
plexity, stress-testing, trade-
oﬀ of bias and loss metric,
model extraction
Retraining of the ac-
tual model with dif-
ferent parameters
Audit of the Rotter-
dams’ welfare fraud
ADM[20, 21]
White-box
access
Access to the whole
architecture f and all
documents
Documents and speciﬁc ex-
planations, model selection
and validation, model se-
lection and development,
model security evaluation
Experimental audits
(interventions)
Accessible by ﬁrst-
parties and possibly
second-parties
Table 2. The Table presents leveled access modes from ’process acces s’ to ’white-box
access’. We connected access modes with ’what is accessed’, tools and feasible audit
types. The table must be read so that in each access mode possi ble tools, audit types
and accesses are added to those that were in the level before. This may not be the case
only for process access, since documents are not available i n each access level. The table
is inspired and derived from Koshiyama et al. [48], Koshiyam a et al. [47] and Brown
et al. [13]. As in the case of table 1, this table should provid e only an overview. We
derived the table via literature review and not via systemat ic methods. A systematic
evaluation may not be feasible as the ﬁeld is still emerging. However, we aim to illustrate
the connection between data access and audit methods and dem onstrate the trade-oﬀ
between access and revealed information.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 19
the case of the cooperative audit of pymetrics’ candidate screen ing software the
auditors had ‘grey-box’ access, as the outcome is not feasible 75 for recruitment
algorithms76[101]. In the case of ProRepublicas investigation of the recidivism
risk scoring system they had access to the model, the training data and the actual
outcome [49]. In the case of Rotterdam’s welfare fraud audit, the a uditors had
parameter control and learning goal access [20]. Model access alo ne has shown its
eﬀectiveness through certain case study audits. Audits, including Bloomberg’s
stable diﬀusion audit [65], examinations of discrimination in online ad delive ry
[89], and the audit of radicalization pathways on YouTube [80], have ac hieved
auditing outcomes with limited access, albeit frequently encounterin g challenges
due to legal constraints. Especially in the case of Gender Shades, w here after
the audit there was an improvement in several facial recognition to ols in terms
of functionality for black women [74]. This proofs limited ’black-box’ ac cess for
researchers can contribute to mitigating harm.
While other levels of access might provide more comprehensive insight s into
a system, the prevalence of reverse-engineering methods under scores the signif-
icant inﬂuence of third-party audits. Admittedly, a system-tailore d approach is
necessary, given the nuances involved, and model-agnostic audits , such as partial
dependency plots and feature relevance plots, present challenge s [39]. Nonethe-
less, it is evident that third-party audits, even with ’black-box’ acc ess, have
managed to provide insights when combined with evaluations of the so ciotech-
nical framework. Particularly because they contribute to a syste m for which the
depth of knowledge acquired corresponds to the access level, aud its with even
minimal access can generate momentum for obtaining greater acce ss. In some
cases, this may involve collaborating with other auditors and stakeh olders. This
concept is further explored in the next section (section 4.2) It is wo rth noting
that substantial examination by sock puppets or API audits is ofte n feasible only
for products that possess open APIs.
4.2 An AI Audit Ecosystem
Algorithmic accountability regards a networked account for an algo rithmic sys-
tem, where several actors must explain and justify to a forum or s everal fora
their use or design of an algorithmic system, as well as the decisions a nd the
subsequent eﬀects concerning the system. The fora can be inter nal and external,
as well as formal and informal [99]. Novelli et al. [66] have deﬁned th e goals of AI
accountability as (1) compliance, (2) reporting, (3) oversight, an d (4) enforce-
ment. Although audits interfere with reporting and enforcement, they primarily
achieve compliance and oversight. Compliance concerns the binding o f the sys-
tem to align with ethical, legal, or technical norms. For example, perf orming an
75 As it’s unknowable if someone would have performed well that did not get the job.
76 This audit was criticized as [103] claimed that the authors g ot funded by the com-
pany for reducing the scope of the audit. If this claim is just iﬁed, this would mean
that the audit would not been conducted by independent exter nal auditors, but de-
pendent and thus internal auditors. The example again demon strates the power of
tech companies.

20 D. Hartmann et al.
ethical assessment may constitute compliance. Typically, complianc e refers to
compliance with the law. Oversight seeks to ﬁnd relevant facts abou t the sys-
tem, such as performance, bias metrics, or other measures, thr ough an overseeing
body that can be internal or external.
In order to ensure oversight and compliance, Raji et al. [76] and A lbert [3]
have proposed establishing an AI audit ecosystem that includes inte rnal and
external auditors. Sambasivan et al. [81] have called for the estab lishment of
an ecosystem for accountability in India that includes various stake holders and
empowers oppressed communities. M¨ okander et al. [62], meanwhile, have argued
that the AIA de facto proposes to establish an AI audit ecosystem . However,
none of these authors have described what constitutes an audit e cosystem or
why we need one. While following this line of reasoning about the importa nce
of including diverse auditors, we deﬁne an audit ecosystem and argu e that the
AIA does not establish an AI audit ecosystem.
We deﬁne an AI audit ecosystem as an open dynamic partial self-org anizing
community of hierarchically independent, yet interdependent hete rogeneous au-
ditors and audit types 77. The characteristics are described by the following:
– open, meaning that it interferes with other accountability process es, such as
reporting, enforcement, and harm incident reporting
– dynamic over time (and thereby adaptive to new forms of AI system s, which
may have to be audited diﬀerently) and over stakeholders (it must in volve
potentially aﬀected communities and users)
– partial self-organization of auditors in an enabling environment 78 and a pro-
motion of sharing audit information through interaction between au ditors
(formal and informal)
The audit ecosystem is needed to ensure compliance and oversight t hrough-
out the AI lifecycle. We argue that for such an ecosystem, third-p arty audits by
researchers and civil society are a vital component to fulﬁll the ch aracteristics
of the ecosystem and thus also provide both oversight and complian ce through
ﬁrst-party audits. Novelli et al. [66] have stated that “[o]verseer s may act at
diﬀerent levels that may overlap, e.g., an internal audit is compatible w ith ju-
dicial review accountability.” However, we argue that overseers should act at
diﬀerent levels, as (1) internal audits are prone to audit-washing a s well as false
assurances, and they may only ensure compliance (see section 4.3) and are (2)
not adaptive to new technologies (see section 4.3). Additionally we ar gue that
(3) NGOs and researchers possess valuable experience in incorpor ating a holistic
perspective that encompasses socioecological-technical system s. They are able
to draw from a background in conducting impact assessments and h uman rights
considerations (see section 4.4) and (4) tend to include aﬀected co mmunities
more than companies as they have other audience and incentives (s ee section
4.4).
77 Inspired by ecological, digital and innovation ecosystems : ”a community of hierar-
chically independent, yet interdependent heterogeneous p articipants who collectively
generate an ecosystem output”[92].
78 See in anti-corruption social accountability ecosystems [ 38]

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 21
4.3 Why Are Internal Audits Insuﬃcient?
Internal audits and assessments have emerged as a prevalent fo cus in the aca-
demic discourse. In alignment with this trend several regulations – t he Algorith-
mic Accountability Act of 2022 in the US, the AIA, and GDPR enforcem ent
– call for ﬁrst-party audits, underscoring their outsized focus in academia and
governance [76]. Internal audits have the advantage that the de velopers know
their system best and have “white-box” access [48]. This provides t hem the most
technical knowledge about the system and they can intervene at a ny stage of
the design process as well as throughout the AI lifecycle. It also pu ts the burden
of responsibility for harm prevention on the shoulders of the develo pers and de-
ployers 79 and thus on those who establish a business model with it. Nonetheles s,
as demonstrated by precedent audit domains, the adequacy of int ernal audits
in ensuring comprehensive oversight has been called into question, a s [76] has
highlighted.
“Audit Washing” and F alse Assurances Furthermore, the overreliance on
internal audits could lead to unveriﬁable assertions that the AI sys tems has
passed ethical and legal standards, leading to even more harm and less oversight
[36]. There is an ongoing discussion within research communities on how to
translate ethics into practice. The discussion evolves around which fairness met-
rics should be used as fairness remains a contested term [61]. Gener al standards
and norms for audits [22] are therefore absent. This leads to an en vironment
conducive to the phenomenon of “audit-washing”. A ﬁrm’s business goals may
not always align with harm-reduction through course-correction o r ethical design
of their products. Developers and deployers may ignore audit reco mmendations
that threaten their business interests [64].
Empirical research substantiate these concerns. McNamara et a l. [58] have
discovered that instructing developers to incorporate ethical co des yielded no
notable change in their established practices. Moreover, studies in volving AI de-
velopment companies [95] and startup-like environments[94] have s hown a dis-
connect between acknowledging the signiﬁcance of ethics and integ rating them
into AI practices, indicating a substantial gap between ethical res earch and prac-
tical implementation and auditing.
Such absence of standards and norms in corporate environments could lead
to using tools and metrics that play down the risks of ones own produ ct [43].
Statistically, through p-hacking or data dredging , and more generally through
fairness gerrymandering , it may always be possible to suggest that your sys-
tem is fair [8]. Issues concerning independence of second-party au ditors were
discussed frequently in ﬁnancial audits. The opinion paper on this iss ue of Baz-
erman et al. [9] highlights the the emerging bias towards the client in co ntractual
relationship audits. In addition to intentional false assurances of t he absence of
harm, audits may be performed incorrectly or issues may go unaddr essed. That
is what happened in the Gender Shades audit [14]. It revealed ﬁrst as sessment
79 If both parties are the same company.

22 D. Hartmann et al.
and benchmarks by the U.S. National Institute of Technology (NIS T) failed to
measure demographic diﬀerences in their regular Facial Recognition Vendor’s
Test [76].
Several possible adjustments address for these issues. Costan za-Chock et al.
[22] have proposed mandating (1) the publishing of (ﬁrst-party) a udit results, (2)
harm incident reporting and other measures to detect and report harms, (3) the
involvement of aﬀected parties, and (4) the consideration of accr editation and
standards for evaluation. Although all points are valuable for an au dit ecosystem,
we argue that the involvement of aﬀected parties and standards f or evaluation
are only valuable if third-party audits support the ecosystem. (1) and (2) are par-
ticularly important for an open and balanced ecosystem, as informa tion-sharing
is promoted, and multiple self-organized auditors can immediately not e and re-
view potential harm incidents. While (4) is especially important for fun ctioning
enforcement, (3) is a basic condition for a dynamic audit ecosystem ; otherwise,
possible harm remains unnoticed.
Standards, Gaming the System and Goodhart’s Law The development of
standards is vital for compliance and veriﬁcation. However, hard s tandards and
technical targets (e.g. bias metrics) can also lead to decoupling fro m the intended
purpose. In ﬁnancial audits, decoupling was described as an audit p rocess that
becomes ”ceremonial” and rote. This can happen when the entity un dergoing
auditing has internal control structures that ritualize and chann el outside audits
[70].
Gaming the system is connected to Goodhart’s law, which is usually par a-
phrased as ”When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a go od measure.”
Thus, behaviors are created to achieve the metrics while pursuing o ther business
incentives simultaneously. It could encourage adherence to metric s while main-
taining business. Methods to game the system emerge to avoid implem enting
the desired behavior measured by the metrics [70]. For example, in th e ﬁnancial
crisis, banks went bankrupt, which had been recently testiﬁed solv ent [86].
The Wirecard scandal in Germany shows that hard standards do no t nec-
essarily help to uncover harm. Even though the company was audite d several
times by diﬀerent second-party auditors it was still not revealed th at the busi-
ness model of Wirecard was a ﬁnancial fraud [54]. In both cases, t he companies
learned to game the system, and game the standards. The Wirecar d scandal
was ultimately uncovered by investigative journalists [56]. This examp le demon-
strates once again that there should be external oversight by su ch institutions,
which do not have to adhere to hard standards and entrenched au dit processes.
This is all the more evident when it comes to new technologies that are devel-
oping rapidly.
Non-adaptivity to New AI T echnologies Through Hard Standar ds In-
ternal audits and hard standards have several drawbacks. Firs t, social account-
ability in the public sector has demonstrated that strict process-b ased evalu-
ations often slow down government action and suppress creativity . Therefore

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 23
performance-based evaluations in audits are preferable to proce ss-based ones.
The role of civil society can be crucial in that regard, as it functions as a vig-
ilant watchdog over both procedural integrity and performance o utcomes. The
involvement of civil society can introduce innovative performance m etrics to
supplement existing measures [1].
Especially the AI standardization process, as currently envisaged under the
AIA, has its challenges with respect to that. In this standardizatio n process, har-
monized standards are adopted following a standardization reques t (mandate)
from the Commission to the European Standardization Organization s (CEN,
CENELEC, building the CEN-CENELEC JTC21 technical joint committe e) for
the application of Union harmonization legislation to harmonize AI stan dards
[57].
This process was criticized several times [52, 57, 102]. First, the p rocess itself
is non-participatory in nature [102]. Second, the imposition of hard s tandards
on ethical questions that are inherently context-sensitive and dy namic with new
technologies is problematic [52].
Third, in an audit ecosystem of hard standards – like in the AIA case –
‘gaming the system’ can occur from companies trying to exploit thos e standards
and ﬁnd loopholes. At the same time, new technologies in particular ca n create
standardization gaps. To create an adaptive and dynamic audit eco system infor-
mal audits without hard standards and processes could help to exp ose potential
harm.
This becomes particularly evident if there is no external oversight f rom third
parties capable of reproducing these evaluations. Novel AI produ cts and tech-
nologies could necessitate the development of new evaluation metho ds. New
ethical questions arise, which may have to include ethical trade-oﬀ s navigated
by local and diverse stakeholder inclusion. For example, in the afore mentioned
Gender Shades case [14] or in recent examples of LLMs and stable d iﬀusion [65].
Although the relevant legislation and standards do not yet exist, it is diﬃcult
to imagine that if evaluation standards had existed, they would have worked for
these type of AI systems. Developing standards for evaluating te chnology will
take a long time, which is why it is necessary that third parties with limite d
access to the model engage in evaluating and understanding emerg ing systems.
This happened with the stable diﬀusion audit by Bloomberg[65] 80 and with
ChatGPT, which researchers extensively evaluated and which show ed biases [78].
4.4 Why Should We Include Researchers and Civil Society in th e
AI Audit Ecosystem?
Third-party Domain Knowledge We emphasized the signiﬁcance of audit-
ing both the visible external connections and the internal self-reg ulatory mech-
anisms of algorithmic systems. NGOs, researchers, journalists, a nd members of
civil society oﬀer domain expertise that is absent in the organization s deploying
80 Reporters used stable diﬀusion to generate 5,100 images of p eople using a simple
recurring prompt iterating through diﬀerent categories. T hrough data-labeling

24 D. Hartmann et al.
algorithms [1]. Identifying such contextualities involves a broad rang e of per-
spectives about the impacts that such systems might entail. AI exp erts might
not be capable of addressing this issue.
According to Li et al. [53], AI auditors are not always aware of the wa y
digital technologies aﬀect marginalized communities, and their tools f or investi-
gating bias, for example, might not necessarily detect behavior tha t could not
be reasonably predicted before its deployment. Instead, the aut hors write, “most
expert-led auditing methods were developed to detect statistical disparities not,
for example, if an algorithm is censuring or harmfully depicting a margin alized
community in images or the provision of online services.” This is why we ar gue
that researchers and civil society representatives potentially ha ve speciﬁc domain
knowledge that include sociotechnical system thinking, as they hav e knowledge
of the human rights impacts that might take place in speciﬁc domains e xactly
for their proximity to marginalized or aﬀected communities. However , including
also the communities impacted by the systems, and not those who re search or
support them, may also prove fundamental for the advancement of systems that
duly protect rights.
Inclusion of Aﬀected Communities Pro-accountability endeavors that en-
compass diverse interests and ideologies incorporate more legitimac y than those
driven by a limited group of professionals [1]. This is why scholars (e.g. [22], [53])
have recommended the inclusion of stakeholders who are or can be a ﬀected by
AI technologies, or their representatives, in audits.
We call this a participatory audit 81, as it consists of a framework that aims
to promote the participation of aﬀected stakeholders in diﬀerent s tages of the
design, development, and deployment of AI systems. Audits that c onsider indi-
vidual or collective accounts of experiences related to algorithmic b ias, harm,
or injustice through incident reporting are currently predominant ly third-party
algorithmic audits [77].
Some authors have cited similar approaches for AI auditing as user- engaged
approaches; these would consist of the direct participation of use rs of AI-based
applications in surfacing harmful algorithmic behaviors in activities su ch as those
called “bias bounty” [34]. . In this sense, one can frame participator y audits as a
set of diﬀerent methodologies to include users or aﬀected individuals and groups
as a whole in AI auditing processes.
81 At this point, it is important to note that the terminology su rrounding what we call
participatory audits has not yet been consolidated. When aﬃ rming the relevance
of participatory audits in the context of governments’ acco untability,[10] refers to
“social audits” in a way that is very similar to what we descri be as participatory. Ac-
cording to him, they diﬀer from other forms of audits because they are performed by
nonexperts and rely on engagement from citizens and/or civi l society organizations.
It is a mechanism of oversight, of exerting control on govern ment oﬃcials to ensure
transparency, responsiveness, and eﬀectiveness by puttin g citizens in the position of
active participants, not mere sources of information [10].

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 25
Through methods such as workshops, bias bounty programs, and direct in-
terviews, individuals potentially harmed by these systems can identif y problems
and help ﬁnd solutions. That is why civil society organizations, resea rchers and
investigative journalists could beneﬁt from involving aﬀected commu nities and
users in their analysis of these technologies. Besides, AI developer s and providers
should have the capability to do the same, so as to involve impacted gr oups from
the early design of their systems. The same applies to auditors, who can have
their assessments of algorithms from having access to other pers pectives in order
to identify other impacts posed by these technologies. However, d espite the po-
tential beneﬁts, there is lack of incentives for such participatory methodologies
to be put into place. That is why regulation and incentives should lead d evel-
opers, deployers and auditors to take this sort of action. Succes sful community
engagement depends on the willingness of the audited organization t o genuinely
listen, respond, and act on the concerns and recommendations ide ntiﬁed dur-
ing the audit process [1]. Aﬀected communities may trust third-part y auditors
more than internal audits conducted by the organization itself. Th is trust can
encourage community members to openly share their perspectives , concerns, and
experiences during the audit process.
Information and Power Asymmetries In the past, understanding and evalu-
ating platforms has encountered considerable challenges due to ins uﬃcient trans-
parency in their operations despite their vast power and inﬂuence. For years,
users and regulators were frequently unaware of these digital pla tforms’ internal
functioning, inhibiting the eﬀective resolution of misinformation, dat a protec-
tion, and content moderation. Although the DSA points in the right d irection
by challenging information and power asymmetries, ’audit capture’ is possible.
The risk is that large tech companies leverage their market power ag ainst their
new mandatory auditors [50]. Because we have let the market power of large
tech companies evolve for years without proper regulation.
A comparable scenario is occurring with AI products with the focus o n con-
formity assessments by the AIA. In general power asymmetries a re present in the
standardization process, too. As the process of standardizing a udits is ongoing,
and the extent of public involvement remains uncertain, standards are usually
developed by standard-setting organizations in which industry rep resentatives
exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence. In contrast, the voices of civil society and consumer
advocates are often overheard [17]. Therefore, researchers [2 3] demand that poli-
cymakers take the necessary steps to improve the overall stand ardization process,
including the structural and organizational framework of standa rdization organi-
zations, to facilitate an inclusive and democratic system that provid es for broad
stakeholder engagement and dialogue and input on the development of technical
standards. Third-party data access is one measure to involve civil society.
In section 4.1, we learned that third-party audits can uncover har ms even
with limited access. To understand possible harms, researchers mu st be able to
access data. This understanding is crucial for developing new stan dards. Cur-
rently, there is an imbalance where data is collected about both user s and non-

26 D. Hartmann et al.
users of platforms and algorithmic systems, but there is only limited a ccess for
researchers to understand how this data is used [96]. Therefore, an audit ecosys-
tem needs to provide leveled access to diﬀerent auditors who should publish and
share their audit results. This leveled access can help reduce these information
and power imbalances.
4.5 Challenges Of Third-Party Audits
Third-party audits have some drawbacks. These auditors may lack the techni-
cal knowledge or capacity to thoroughly research a system. Ther e is also a risk
of revealing secret information or company secrets, which can be p revented by
including nondisclosure clauses. However, to protect the auditors , safe harbor
clauses should be included as well to prevent them from intentional o r unknow-
ingly leaking trade secrets. Companies may fear to share their mode l and data
[22]. However, there are best-practices in the case of VLOPs via an API and a
vetting process. Further, there are techniques available for ade quately protect-
ing or anonymizing data while still providing access and other industrie s like the
ﬁnance sector where there are legal ptrotections in the case of d ata leakage [16].
At the same time, one could say that p-hacking [8] allows third partie s to
select the metrics that indicate harm. However, this is not the same as the
ﬁrst-party audit case, as other researchers could quickly verify the harm. Civil
society and social organizations would have no interest in making a ba d name
for themselves.
Furthermore, the AI Now Institute argues that third-party aud its shift re-
sponsibility to researchers and aﬀected communities. However, we cannot rely
on these groups to have the resources to audit AI technologies [43 ] eﬀectively.
We see it as one measure that can work alongside other measures, s uch as au-
dits through regulators, internal audits, transparency, and th e aforementioned
accountability processes.
While solving these problems presents considerable challenges, it is wo rth
noting that the absence of civil society oversight would yield even mo re unfa-
vorable outcomes. Adequate funding is essential to alleviate the bu rdens on civil
society and research. Without such audits, achieving comprehens ive accountabil-
ity remains inadequate.
Recognizing the diﬃculties inherent in civil society and researcher au dits, it
is crucial to acknowledge that algorithm auditing represents only a s ingle facet
within the broader algorithm accountability framework. To establish genuine
algorithm accountability, it is imperative to consider that algorithm au diting
operates with various other factors, forming an intricate ecosys tem [2]. This is
why we demand the AI audit ecosystem to be open and interfere with other
accountability processes. An essential component for that is act ual enforcement,
that is, post-audit actions such as Raji and Buolamwini [74]’s demand s for harm
reduction. This in turn requires European institutions that implemen t proper
enforcement.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 27
5 Addressing the Regulatory Gap: An EU AI Audit
Ecosystem
Third-party audits by research and civil society are essential for an AI audit
ecosystem. (1) Third parties can provide oversight as watchdogs against audit
washing and false assurances. (2) Third-party audits can questio n standards,
which could prevent the decoupling of audits, as in ﬁnancial audits. ( 3) Third-
party audits are adaptive to new technologies. In the context of ( 2) and (3), con-
ducting audits through third-party entities gains further signiﬁca nce, as they can
scrutinize evolving standards and raise critical inquiries [51]. (4) Th ird parties
promote sensitivity to the sociotechnical system and (5) aﬀected communities.
(6) Last but not least, third-party audits and data access challen ge information
and power asymmetries of the platform economy. At the same time, we have
shown that the DSA and AIA refer diﬀerently to third-party audits and permit
diﬀerent data access for third parties. We will assess these appro aches to third
parties and propose policy recommendations.
5.1 Evaluation of the Audit Status Quo in the DSA and the AIA
The DSA and the draft delegated act do not specify any additional r equirements
for the audit ﬁrm. 82 This should be viewed critically for the two reasons: Firstly,
it does not specify the requirements to be met by each criterion. Fo r example,
it does not explain in suﬃcient detail what level of “proven expertise ” or su-
pervisory steps are required to ensure compliance. In addition, th e requirement
of independence gives rise to discussion. 83 Secondly, it is unclear whether au-
dit ﬁrms need to be reviewed by bodies other than the VLOPs and VLO Es to
ensure their proper functioning. However, as a regulatory instru ment can only
be as eﬀective as the institutions that enforce it, the ﬁnal version of the dele-
gated regulation needs to set out more speciﬁc requirements. On t he one hand,
it should give priority to independent checks on the competent selec tion of au-
ditors by setting out basic independence requirements. On the oth er hand, the
regulation should provide for additional (oﬃcial) supervision.
As noted above, the EU AIA trilogue version relies primarily on interna l
conformity assessment as a means of assurance. The fact that t he focus of the
AIA is mainly on self-regulation is questionable because there is a lot at stake:
82 The wording of Art. 37 DSA (“the organisations carrying out t he audits”, Art. 37
(2) DSA) does not provide any further details on this. Thus, A rt. 4 (1) Delegated
Regulation on Independent Audits refers to Art. 37 DSA, acco rding to which the
provider must check whether the organisation to be selected meets the requirements
of paragraph 3 before selecting the audit organisation. Fur thermore, the Commission
deﬁnes the term audit organisation means an individual orga nisation, a consortium
or other combination of organisations, including any sub-c ontractors, that the au-
dited provider has contracted to perform an independent aud it in accordance with
Article 37 DSA.
83 For example, Spindler [87], who raises concerns, for exampl e, that this does not clar-
ify constellations in which an aﬃliate of the auditing compa ny advises the provider

28 D. Hartmann et al.
high-risk AI systems covered by the AIA can violate numerous legal interests, e.
g. people’s health and lives at risk, but also damage property or the e nvironment
or violate legal interests such as the protection of privacy. Moreo ver, implement-
ing the risk-based approach of the AIA requires taking preventive measures that
should not solely rely on the assessment of the AI provider, especia lly for high-
risk systems [46].
Given the risks, whether a ﬁrst-party internal audit can provide t he neces-
sary oversight of such potentially harmful high-risk AI systems is q uestionable.
Despite regulatory requirements, enforcing internal conformity assessments is
likely to be less stringent than it appears at ﬁrst glance. In addition, conformity
assessments that the provider voluntarily has carried out by third parties are
likely to be rare in practice. Indeed, providers of high-risk systems are usually
in the best position to understand and assess the conformity of th e AI systems
they develop. However, it is doubtful that ﬁrst parties will seek to ﬁnd all poten-
tial harms and thus ﬁnd out their system does not comply with the AI A’s legal
standards. We have laid out the issues of internal audits in the prev ious section.
For the above reasons, the requirements for audit ﬁrms in both th e DSA and
the AIA must be amended. The explicit inclusion of third parties would b e bene-
ﬁcial under both acts. Under the current rules, there is a risk tha t providers will
only engage second-party auditors to conduct mandatory annua l assessments.
This focus can not create an open, dynamic, and self-organizing ec osystem in-
cluding various stakeholders. We have established the value of third -party audits
for an AI audit ecosystem and shown that AI regulation in the EU mus t include
third-party audits and their data access to account for appropr iate oversight
apart from compliance by ﬁrst-party audits.
5.2 Advantages of Broader Data Access for (V etted) Research ers
Purely relying on process access for third-party audits, as exemp liﬁed by the
AMS algorithm in section 4.1, presents diﬃculties due to the inherent o pacity of
the system’s workings. This is why there is a growing call for a gradua ted sys-
tem of access levels among various groups [48]. Consequently, we ad vocate for a
minimum requirement to enable ’black-box’ access, preferably exte nded to non-
vetted researchers without the need for formal accreditation. Reddit, Facebook,
and Twitter opted to discontinue their APIs, which had been the aut horized
avenue for third parties to access and retrieve information regar ding user activi-
ties on the platform. This situation exposes researchers to legal lia bilities due to
potential breaches of, for example, Facebook’s Terms of Service , as previously
elucidated in the context of AlgorithmWatch’s data donation case [55 ].
The research eﬀorts undertaken in this context should be safegu arded by
robust safe-harbor provisions that grant legal immunity to these researchers
thereby shielding them from potential legal charges linked to hackin g or unau-
thorized access, as the AI Now Institute demands [43]. This framew ork would
oﬀer protection to those conducting audits that potentially expos e harm, thereby
incentivizing such assessments. More widespread access to resea rch data can, to
some extent, reduce this power imbalance through ”audit capture ” [50]. Broader

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 29
access to data should prevent such scenarios of audit capture, s een when Face-
book halted AlgorithmWatch’s research on Instagram; this emphas izes the role
of third-party audits and other measures to reduce market powe r.
Consequently, one fundamental proposition is the establishment o f a right
to scrape, although an even more eﬀective approach could involve m andatory
APIs. However, implementing the latter may pose challenges for non -vetted re-
searchers, as it might inadvertently allow them to utilize the product without in-
curring costs. For vetted researchers, broader access should be granted, enabling
performance assessments akin to the approach taken in the Gend er Shades case
and possibly allowing the measurement of facial recognition perform ance. We
acknowledge that the DSA includes such access for vetted resear chers.
We have seen that NGOs have can ensure social accountability and o versight
trough domain knowledge and inclusion of aﬀected people. At the sam e time,
journalists have already shown in the past how important they are a s an ac-
countability component in ﬁnancial audits and also in algorithmic audits . It is
for this reason that we believe that the extension of vetted resea rchers to include
NGOs and journalists makes sense. This extension could be done in th e dele-
gated acts by describing vetted researchers in a broad manner su ch that NGOs
and journalists are included.
As has been shown, the AIA does not contain any provisions compar able
to the DSA that facilitate regulated access by researchers to dat a held by AI
providers. This is surprising given that, according to the rationale f or its adop-
tion, the AIA should in principle facilitate this. We recommend that this position
be reconsidered and added to the ﬁnal document.
5.3 Policy Recommendations
Explicit Inclusion of Third Parties Future AI regulations should explicitly in-
clude provisions for third-party audits and third-party access by researchers,
civil society, and regulators. This ensures a more comprehensive a nd indepen-
dent assessment of AI products and platform and moves towards establishing an
EU AI audit ecosystem.
Inclusion of NGOs and Investigative Journalists In the DSA delegated act on
data access, we recommend including NGOs and investigative journa lists as
vetted researchers who can perform third-party audits. Their in volvement can
ensure social accountability through domain knowledge and special access to
aﬀected communities. Additionally, journalists have demonstrated their impor-
tance in ﬁnancial and algorithmic audits as an accountability compone nt in the
past.
Third-Party Access in AIA Incorporate provisions for third-party access in the
AIA, particularly for “high-risk” AI systems. These provisions ens ure that criti-
cal systems undergo rigorous scrutiny and that hard standards can be questioned
in the light of new technologies.

30 D. Hartmann et al.
Incentivize Third-Party Audits Create incentives, such as funding or tax bene-
ﬁts, to encourage organizations to undergo third-party audits v oluntarily. These
incentives can be funded through companies managed by the gover nment or
government funding. This promotes an enabling environment for an AI audit
ecosystem and thus the promotion of algorithmic conformity asses sment proce-
dures within the framework of all regulations. The government cou ld choose the
researchers eligible for funding in the case of the DSA (should be tho ught of
in the delegated acts) and through a multistakeholder board in the A IA which
includes state-run ADMs.
Publish Audit Results Nondisclosures of audit results should be an exception if
sensitive information or trade secrets are undeniably part of the a udit results.
Otherwise, mandate the publication of anonymized audit results, wh ether con-
ducted by ﬁrst, second, or third parties. This can inform other au ditors and
promote further knowledge sharing.
Harm Incident Reporting and Detection Implement measures to detect and re-
port AI-related harms. Establish a framework for reporting incide nts and ensure
post-audit actions and enforcement are taken.
Whistleblower Protections in AI Companies Whistleblower protections for em-
ployees who expose violations of AI standards, legal and regulator y requirements,
civil rights, and human rights should be strengthened. Whistleblowe rs should be
shielded from retaliation. The EU Whistleblower Protection Directive [ 28] is a
step in the right direction and will be welcomed. It will be compelling to se e how
AIA and the EU Whistleblower Protection Directive interact.
Safe Harbor Provisions for Auditing Entities Implement safe harbor provisions
speciﬁcally for researchers, NGOs, and investigative journalists w ho conduct AI
audits. These entities should be granted legal protection from ret aliatory ac-
tions when conducting audits in good faith. Safe harbor provisions s hould apply
when audits are conducted according to established standards an d guidelines
and ﬁndings are reported accurately.
Legalization of Web Scraping for AI Auditing Recognize the importance of web
scraping as a valuable tool for researchers, NGOs, and investigat ive journalists
engaged in AI auditing activities. Establish clear legal frameworks th at permit
responsible web scraping when it is carried out for legitimate researc h and au-
diting purposes. These frameworks should include safeguards to p rotect against
misuse and ensure the ethical and responsible use of web scraping t echniques.
6 Conclusion
We deﬁned audit types – focusing on third-party audits – and analyz ed to which
extent they are included in the EU regulatory framework, with a foc us on the
DSA and the AIA.

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 31
According to our analysis, the DSA will establish a novel institutional system
that involves third-party audits, provides data access for vette d researchers as
well as access to openly available data for non-vetted researcher s. However, the
requirements for independence of auditors in the DSA still need to b e speciﬁed.
The AIA, on its turn, relies primarily on internal conformity assessm ent with
external assessments that can be mandated by the regulator. A t present, access
for researchers or independent auditors is not explicitly intended.
Based on this analysis, we deﬁne an AI audit ecosystem that accoun ts for
compliance and oversight and demonstrate the existence of a regu latory gap.
We emphasize that third-party audits by independent organisation s, researchers
and civil society, as well as through inspection by regulators, must be part of
that ecosystem. The AIA, in this sense, should have included data a nd model
access for vetted researchers and civil society organisations to assess “high-risk”
AI products, as is partially the case of the DSA’s provisions allowing fo r vet-
ted researchers — although not civil society organisations — to hav e access to
sensitive information on the AI systems.
We hope to contribute to the emerging ﬁeld of audits as a means of ac count-
ability. In doing so, we aim to sharpen the focus on aﬀected communit ies and
incorporate past lessons from platform research and ﬁnancial au dits. We recom-
mend establishing a diverse AI audit ecosystem to ensure compliance and over-
sight. We concur with Raji et al. [76]’s demands for an “ecosystem in w hich third
parties can not only survive in their role, but thrive in directly confro nting, ver-
ifying, and subjecting to scrutiny the performance claims made by c orporations,
while adequately addressing complaints of harm brought forth by th e impacted
population.” Our policy proposals point to democratizing accountabilit y, and we
hope future AI regulations and the EU directives mentioned here will address
them.
7 Compliance with Ethical Standards
7.1 Conﬂict of Interest
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that t here is no conﬂict
of interest.

Bibliography
[1] Ackerman, J.M.: Social accountability in the public sector. Social D evel-
opment Papers (2005)
[2] Ada Lovelace Institute: Examining the black box: Tools for
assessing algorithmic systems. the Black Box (2020), URL
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/examining-the-black-box-tools-for-assessing 
[3] Albert, J.: A diverse auditing ecosystem is
needed to uncover algorithmic risks (2023), URL
https://algorithmwatch.org/en/diverse-auditing-ecos ystem-for-algorithmic-risks/
[4] Algorithmwatch: Draft ai act: EU needs to live up to its own
ambitions in terms of governance and enforcement (2021), URL
https://algorithmwatch.org/en/wp-content/uploads/20 21/08/EU-AI-Act-Consultation-Submis 
accessed on August 3, 2023
[5] Allhutter, D., Mager, A., Cech, F., Fischer, F., Grill, G.: Der ams algo-
rithmus - eine soziotechnische analyse des arbeitsmarktchancen- assistenz-
systems (amas). Tech. Rep. ITA 2020-02, Institut f¨ ur Technik folgen-
Absch¨ atzung der ¨Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien
(2020)
[6] Asghari, H., Birner, N., Burchardt, A., Dicks, D., Faßbender, J., F eld-
hus, N., Hewett, F., Hofmann, V., Kettemann, M.C., Schulz, W., Simon,
J., Stolberg-Larsen, J., Z¨ uger, T.: What to explain when explaining is
diﬃcult. An interdisciplinary primer on XAI and meaningful informa-
tion in automated decision-making. Tech. rep., Zenodo (Mar 2022), URL
https://zenodo.org/record/6375784
[7] Bail, C.A., Argyle, L.P., Brown, T.W., Bumpus, J.P., Chen, H., Hunza-
ker, M.B.F., Lee, J., Mann, M., Merhout, F., Volfovsky, A.: Exposure t o
opposing views on social media can increase political polarization. Pro ceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Am erica
115(37), 9216–9221 (2018), ISSN 0027-8424
[8] Bandy, J.: Problematic Machine Behavior: A Systematic Litera-
ture Review of Algorithm Audits. Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction 5(CSCW1), 74:1–74:34 (Apr 2021), URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3449148
[9] Bazerman, M.H., Morgan, K.P., Loewenstein, G.F., et al.: The impossib il-
ity of auditor independence. Sloan management review 38, 89–94 (1997)
[10] Berthin, G.: A practical guide to social audit as
a participatory tool to strengthen democratic gover-
nance, transparency, and accountability (09 2011), URL
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/latinamerica/Practical-Gui 
[11] Bieker, F., Friedewald, M., Hansen, M., Obersteller, H., Rost, M.: A Pro-
cess for Data Protection Impact Assessment Under the Europea n General
Data Protection Regulation. In: Schiﬀner, S., Serna, J., Ikonomou , D.,

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 33
Rannenberg, K. (eds.) Privacy Technologies and Policy, pp. 21–37, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing , Cham
(2016), ISBN 978-3-319-44760-5
[12] Birhane, A., Steed, R., Ojewale, V., Vecchione, B., Raji, I.D.: AI au dit-
ing: The Broken Bus on the Road to AI Accountability (Jan 2024), UR L
http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14462, arXiv:2401.14462 [cs]
[13] Brown, S., Davidovic, J., Hasan, A.: The algorithm audit: Scoring t he algo-
rithms that score us. Big Data & Society 8(1), 2053951720983865 (2021),
URL https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951720983865
[14] Buolamwini, J., Gebru, T.: Gender shades: Intersectional accu racy dis-
parities in commercial gender classiﬁcation. In: Conference on fair ness,
accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91, PMLR (2018)
[15] Buri, J., van Hoboken, J.: The digital services act (dsa) propos al: a critical
overview – discussion paper. Discussion Paper 28 October 2021, Dig ital
Services Act (DSA) Observatory (2021)
[16] Casper, S., Ezell, C., Siegmann, C., Kolt, N., Curtis, T.L., Bucknall,
B., Haupt, A., Wei, K., Scheurer, J., Hobbhahn, M., Sharkey, L., Kr-
ishna, S., Von Hagen, M., Alberti, S., Chan, A., Sun, Q., Gerovitch,
M., Bau, D., Tegmark, M., Krueger, D., Hadﬁeld-Menell, D.: Black-
Box Access is Insuﬃcient for Rigorous AI Audits (Jan 2024), URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14446, arXiv:2401.14446 [cs]
[17] Castets-Renard, C., Besse, P.: Ex ante accountability of the a i act: Between
certiﬁcation and standardization. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Law: Betw een Sec-
toral Rules and Comprehensive Regime. Comparative Law Perspect ives
(Forthcoming), URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=4203925
[18] Chen, Y.J., Chiou, C.M., Huang, Y.W., Tu, P.W., Lee, Y.C., Chien, C.H.:
A comparative study of medical device regulations:: Us, europe, ca nada,
and taiwan. Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science 52(1), 62–
69 (2018), URL https://doi.org/10.1177/2168479017716712, pMID:
29714608
[19] Commission, E.: Draft for commission delegated regulation (eu) b y laying
down rules on the performance of audits for very large online platfo rms
and very large online search engines (2023), URL missing, 5 May 2023
[20] Constantaras, E., Geiger, G., Braun, J.C., Mehrotra, D., Aung, H.:
Inside the Suspicion Machine. Wired (2023), ISSN 1059-1028, URL
https://www.wired.com/story/welfare-state-algorithm s/, section:
tags
[21] Constantaras, E., Geiger, G., Braun, J.C., Mehrotra, D., Aung, H.:
Suspicion Machines Methodology - Lighthouse Reports (2023), URL
https://www.lighthousereports.com/suspicion-machine s-methodology/
[22] Costanza-Chock, S., Raji, I.D., Buolamwini, J.: Who Audits the Aud itors?
Recommendations from a ﬁeld scan of the algorithmic auditing ecosys tem.
In: 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transp arency,
pp. 1571–1583, ACM, Seoul Republic of Korea (Jun 2022), ISBN 97 8-1-
4503-9352-2, URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3531146.3533213

34 D. Hartmann et al.
[23] Ebers, M., Hoch, V.R.S., Rosenkranz, F., Ruschemeier, H., Steinr ¨ otter,
B.: The european commission’s proposal for an artiﬁcial intelli-
gence act—a critical assessment by members of the robotics and a i
law society (rails). J 4(4), 589–603 (2021), ISSN 2571-8800, URL
https://www.mdpi.com/2571-8800/4/4/43
[24] Edwards, L.: Regulating ai in europe: four
problems and four solutions (2022), URL
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/regulating-ai-in-europe/
[25] European Commision: Proposal for a regulation of the eu-
ropean parliament and of the council laying down har-
monised rules on artiﬁcial intelligence (artiﬁcial intelligence
act) and amending certain union legislative acts (2021), URL
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri =celex%3A52021PC0206,
18.08.23
[26] European Commission: DSA: Very Large On-
line Platforms and Search Engines (2022), URL
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_2413,
press release No. IP/23/2413 from 25.04.23
[27] European Commission: Commission delegated regulation (eu)
. . . /. . . of 20.10.2023 supplementing regulation (eu) 2022/2065
of the european parliament and of the council, by laying down
rules on the performance of audits for very large online plat-
forms and very large online search engines (October 20 2023), URL
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri =CELEX%3A32023R6807
[28] European Parliament: Directive (eu) 2019/1937 of the europe an parlia-
ment and of the council. Directive EU 2019/1937, European Parliame nt
(October 2019)
[29] European Parliament: Draft report on the proposal for a reg ulation of the
european parliament and of the council on harmonised rules on artiﬁ cial in-
telligence (artiﬁcial intelligence act) and amending certain union legisla tive
acts. Draft Report COM2021/0206 – C9-0146/2021 – 2021/0106 (COD),
Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, Com mittee
on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Aﬀairs (April 20 2022)
[30] European Parliament: Corrigendum to the position of the euro-
pean parliament adopted at ﬁrst reading on 13 march 2024 with
a view to the adoption of regulation (eu) 2024/ ...... of the euro-
pean parliament and of the council laying down harmonised rules
on artiﬁcial intelligence and amending regulations (ec) no 300/2008,
(eu) no 167/2013, (eu) no 168/2013, (eu) 2018/858, (eu) 2018 /1139
and (eu) 2019/2144 and directives 2014/90/eu, (eu) 2016/797
and (eu) 2020/1828 (artiﬁcial intelligence act). Available online:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9- 2024-0138-FNL-COR01_EN.pdf
(2024), position of the European Parliament adopted at ﬁrst read ing on
13 March 2024. P9
TA(2024)0138 (COM(2021)0206 - C9-0146/2021 -
2021/0106(COD))

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 35
[31] European Parliament, Council of the European Union: Regulatio n
(EU) 2022/2065 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 19 October 2022 on a Single Market For Digital Services and
amending Directive 2000/31/EC (Digital Services Act) (2022), URL
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2065/oj
[32] Floridi, L., Holweg, M., Taddeo, M., Amaya Silva, J., M¨ okander, J., W en,
Y.: capAI - A Procedure for Conducting Conformity Assessment of AI
Systems in Line with the EU Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act (Mar 2022), URL
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4064091
[33] Gaddis, S.M.: An Introduction to Audit Studies in the Social Scienc es
(Aug 2017), URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3024262
[34] Globus-Harris, I., Kearns, M., Roth, A.: An Algorithmic Framewor k for
Bias Bounties (May 2022), URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.10408,
arXiv:2201.10408 [cs]
[35] Goldhaber-Fiebert, J.D., Prince, L.: Impact evalua-
tion of a predictive risk modeling tool for allegheny
county’s child welfare oﬃce (March 20 2019), URL
https://www.alleghenycountyanalytics.us/wp-content/ uploads/2019/05/Impact-Evaluation-fro 
[36] Goodman, E.P., Trehu, J.: AI Audit Washing and Accountability (Se p
2022), URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4227350
[37] Groves, L.: Algorithmic impact assessment:
a case study in healthcare (2022), URL
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/algorithmic-impact-assessment-case-study-h 
[38] Halloran, B.: Accountability ecosystems: The evolution of a keyw ord. Ac-
countability Research Center (2021)
[39] Hansen, S., Loftus, J.: Model-Agnostic Auditing: A Lost Cause? Proceed-
ings of the EW AF’23: European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness (20 23)
[40] Heuer, H.: Audit, don’t explain – recommendations based on a soc io-
technical understanding of ml-based systems. Mensch und Compu ter 2021
- Workshopband (2021)
[41] Hickey, D., Schmitz, M., Fessler, D., Smaldino, P.E., Muric, G., Burgh ardt,
K.: Auditing elon musk’s impact on hate speech and bots. In: Proceed ings
of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vo l. 17,
pp. 1133–1137 (2023)
[42] Kaesling: Art. 40. In: Hofmann, Raue (eds.) Digital Service Act , p. 33,
Nomos (2023)
[43] Kak, A., West, S.M.: Algorithmic Accountability: Mov-
ing Beyond Audits. AI Now Institute (Apr 2023), URL
https://ainowinstitute.org/publication/algorithmic- accountability
[44] Kayser-Bril, N.: AlgorithmWatch forced to shut down Instagra m
monitoring project after threats from Facebook (2021), URL
https://algorithmwatch.org/en/instagram-research-sh ut-down-by-facebook/
[45] Kazim, E., Denny, D.M., Koshiyama, A.: Ai auditing and impact asses s-
ment: According to the uk information commissioner’s oﬃce. AI Ethic s 1,
301–310 (2021), URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-021-00039-2

36 D. Hartmann et al.
[46] Kop, M.: EU Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act: The European Approach t o AI
(Sep 2021), URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3930959
[47] Koshiyama, A., Kazim, E., Treleaven, P.: Algorithm auditing: Manag -
ing the legal, ethical, and technological risks of artiﬁcial intelligence, ma-
chine learning, and associated algorithms. Computer 55(4), 40–50 (2022),
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2021.3067225
[48] Koshiyama, A., Kazim, E., Treleaven, P., Rai, P., Szpruch, L., Pave y,
G., Ahamat, G., Leutner, F., Goebel, R., Knight, A., Adams, J.,
Hitrova, C., Barnett, J., Nachev, P., Barber, D., Chamorro-Premu zic,
T., Klemmer, K., Gregorovic, M., Khan, S., Lomas, E.: Towards Algo-
rithm Auditing: A Survey on Managing Legal, Ethical and Technologi-
cal Risks of AI, ML and Associated Algorithms. SSRN (Jan 2021), UR L
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3778998
[49] Larson, J., Kirchner, L., Mattu, S., Angwin, J.: How We
Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm (2016), URL
https://www.propublica.org/article/how-we-analyzed- the-compas-recidivism-algorithm
[50] Laux, J., Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B.: Taming the Few:
Platform Regulation, Independent Audits, and the Risks of
Capture Created by the DMA and DSA (Sep 2021), URL
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4096655
[51] Laux, J., Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B.: Three Pathways for Sta ndardisation
and Ethical Disclosure by Default under the European Union Artiﬁcia l
Intelligence Act. SSRN Electronic Journal (2023), ISSN 1556-506 8, URL
https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=4365079
[52] Laux, J., Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B.: Three pathways for sta n-
dardisation and ethical disclosure by default under the Eu-
ropean Union Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act. Computer Law &
Security Review 53, 105957 (2024), ISSN 0267-3649, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0267364924000244
[53] Li, R., Kingsley, S., Fan, C., Sinha, P., Wai, N., Lee, J., Shen, H., Eslam i,
M., Hong, J.: Participation and division of labor in user-driven algorithm
audits: How do everyday users work together to surface algorith mic harms?
CHI ’23: Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factor s in
Computing Systems (2023)
[54] L¨ ohlein, L., Huber, C.: The end of audit: Spectacle and love in the audit
society. Qualitative Research in Accounting & Management (2022)
[55] Mancosu, M., Vegetti, F.: What you can scrape and what is
right to scrape: A proposal for a tool to collect public facebook
data. Social Media + Society 6(3), 2056305120940703 (2020), URL
https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305120940703
[56] McCrum, D.: The house of wirecard (2015), URL
https://www.ft.com/content/534e7c4d-3101-3f6a-abc8- dc70beab35b7,
ﬁnancial Times, April 27, 2015
[57] McFadden, M., Jones, K., Taylor, E., Osborn, G.: Harmonising Art iﬁcial
Intelligence: the role of standards in the eu ai regulation. Oxford I nternet
Institute (2021)

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 37
[58] McNamara, A., Smith, J., Murphy-Hill, E.: Does ACM’s code of ethics
change ethical decision making in software development? In: Proce edings
of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineer ing
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engine ering,
pp. 729–733, ACM, Lake Buena Vista FL USA (Oct 2018), ISBN 978- 1-
4503-5573-5, URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3236024.3264833
[59] Metaxa, D., Park, J.S., Robertson, R.E., Karahalios, K., Wilson, C.,
Hancock, J., Sandvig, C.: Auditing algorithms: Understanding algorit h-
mic systems from the outside in. Foundations and Trends ® in Hu-
man–Computer Interaction 14(4), 272–344 (2021), ISSN 1551-3955, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1100000083
[60] Meßmer, A.K., Degeling, M.: Auditing
Recommender Systems (Jan 2023), URL
https://www.stiftung-nv.de/de/publication/auditing- recommender-systems
[61] Munn, L.: The uselessness of AI ethics. AI and Ethics
3(3), 869–877 (Aug 2023), ISSN 2730-5953, 2730-5961, URL
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s43681-022-00209- w
[62] M¨ okander, J., Axente, M., Casolari, F., Floridi, L.: Conformity
Assessments and Post-market Monitoring: A Guide to the Role
of Auditing in the Proposed European AI Regulation. Minds
and Machines 32(2), 241–268 (Jun 2022), ISSN 1572-8641, URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-021-09577-4
[63] M¨ okander, J., Floridi, L.: Ethics-Based Auditing to Develop Trus tworthy
AI. Minds and Machines 31(2), 323–327 (Jun 2021), ISSN 1572-8641, URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-021-09557-8
[64] M¨ okander, J., Schuett, J., Kirk, H.R., Floridi, L.: Auditing large
language models: a three-layered approach (Feb 2023), URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08500, arXiv:2302.08500 [cs]
[65] Nicoletti, L., Bass, D.: Generative AI Takes Stereo-
types and Bias From Bad to Worse (2023), URL
https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2023-generative- ai-bias/
[66] Novelli, C., Taddeo, M., Floridi, L.: Accountability in artiﬁcial intelligen ce:
What it is and how it works. Ai and Society: Knowledge, Culture and
Communication pp. 1–12 (forthcoming)
[67] Ohme, J., Araujo, T., Boeschoten, L., Freelon, D., Ram,
N., Reeves, B.B., Robinson, T.N.: Digital Trace Data Col-
lection for Social Media Eﬀects Research: APIs, Data Dona-
tion, and (Screen) Tracking. Communication Methods and Mea-
sures pp. 1–18 (Feb 2023), ISSN 1931-2458, 1931-2466, URL
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/19312458.2023.2181319
[68] Olteanu, A., Castillo, C., Diaz, F., Kıcıman, E.: Social data: Biases,
methodological pitfalls, and ethical boundaries. Frontiers in big dat a 2,
13 (2019)
[69] Platform, X.D.: Changelog | Twitter Developer Platform (2022), URL
https://developer.twitter.com/en/updates/changelog

38 D. Hartmann et al.
[70] Power, M.: The audit society: Rituals of veriﬁcation. British Jour nal of
Educational Studies 47(1), 92–94 (1999)
[71] Quattrociocchi, W.: Social and political challenges: Western dem ocracy in
crisis? In: Global Risks Report 2017 (2017)
[72] Radiya-Dixit, E., Neﬀ, G.: A sociotechnical audit: Assessing police use
of facial recognition. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conferenc e on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, p. 1334–1346, F AccT ’23, As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2023), ISB N
9798400701924, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3593013.3594084
[73] Raji, D.: Mozilla Open Source Audit Tooling (OAT) Project (2022), URL
https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/what-we-fund/fell owships/oat/
[74] Raji, I.D., Buolamwini, J.: Actionable Auditing: Investigating the Im pact
of Publicly Naming Biased Performance Results of Commercial AI Prod -
ucts. In: Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, E thics,
and Society, pp. 429–435, ACM, Honolulu HI USA (Jan 2019), ISBN 9 78-1-
4503-6324-2, URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3306618.3314244
[75] Raji, I.D., Smart, A., White, R.N., Mitchell, M., Gebru, T., Hutchinson ,
B., Smith-Loud, J., Theron, D., Barnes, P.: Closing the ai accountab ility
gap: Deﬁning an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic au diting.
In: Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountab ility, and
transparency, pp. 33–44 (2020)
[76] Raji, I.D., Xu, P., Honigsberg, C., Ho, D.E.: Outsider Oversight: De sign-
ing a Third Party Audit Ecosystem for AI Governance (Jun 2022), U RL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04737, arXiv:2206.04737 [cs]
[77] Rakova, B., Dobbe, R.: Algorithms as Social-Ecological-Technolog ical Sys-
tems: an Environmental Justice Lens on Algorithmic Audits. In: 202 3 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 491–491
(Jun 2023), URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.05733, arXiv:2305.05733
[cs]
[78] Ray, P.P.: ChatGPT: A comprehensive review on back-
ground, applications, key challenges, bias, ethics, limita-
tions and future scope. Internet of Things and Cyber-
Physical Systems 3, 121–154 (2023), ISSN 26673452, URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S266734522300024X
[79] Reddit: Addressing the community about
changes to our API : r/reddit (2023), URL
https://www.reddit.com/r/reddit/comments/145bram/addressing_the_community_about_changes 
[80] Ribeiro, M.H., Ottoni, R., West, R., Almeida, V.A.F., Meira, W.: Auditing
radicalization pathways on youtube. In: Proceedings of the 2020 C onfer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, p. 131–141 , F AT* ’20,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2020), I SBN
9781450369367, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372879
[81] Sambasivan, N., Arnesen, E., Hutchinson, B., Prabhakaran, V.:
Non-portability of Algorithmic Fairness in India (Dec 2020), URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.03659, arXiv:2012.03659 [cs]

Towards an EU AI Auditing Ecosystem 39
[82] Sandvig, C., Hamilton, K., Karahalios, K., Langbort, C.: Auditing Alg o-
rithms: Research Methods for Detecting Discrimination on Interne t Plat-
forms. Data and Discrimination: Converting Critical Concerns into P ro-
ductive Inquiry (2014)
[83] Sartori, L., Theodorou, A.: A sociotechnical perspective
for the future of ai: narratives, inequalities, and human
control. Ethics and Information Technology 24(4), 315–
328 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-022-09624-3, UR L
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-022-09624-3
[84] Selinger, E., Hartzog, W.: Facebook’s emotional conta-
gion study and the ethical problem of co-opted identity
in mediated environments where users lack control. Re-
search Ethics 12(1), 35–43 (Jan 2016), ISSN 1747-0161, URL
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1747016115579531,
publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd
[85] Shelby, R., Rismani, S., Henne, K., Moon, A., Rostamzadeh, N., Nich olas,
P., Yilla-Akbari, N., Gallegos, J., Smart, A., Garcia, E., Virk, G.: So-
ciotechnical harms of algorithmic systems: Scoping a taxonomy for harm
reduction. In: Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society, p. 723–741, AIES ’23, Association for Comput -
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2023), ISBN 9798400702310, U RL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3600211.3604673
[86] Sikka, P.: Financial crisis and the silence of the auditors. Accoun ting, Or-
ganizations and Society (2009), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.20 09.01.004
[87] Spindler, G.: Die vorschl¨ age der eu-kommission zu einer neuen pr oduk-
thaftung und zur haftung von herstellern und betreibern k¨ unst licher
intelligenz. Computer und Recht 38(11), 689–704 (2022), URL
https://doi.org/10.9785/cr-2022-381106
[88] Stahl, B.C., Antoniou, J., Bhalla, N., et al.: A systematic review of ar tiﬁcial
intelligence impact assessments. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review (2023 )
[89] Sweeney, L.: Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery.
SSRN Electronic Journal (2013), ISSN 1556-5068, URL
http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2208240
[90] The Ada Lovelace Institute: Technical methods for regulator y inspection
of algorithmic systems (2021)
[91] Thelisson, E., Verma, H.: Conformity assessment under the EU A I act
general approach. AI and Ethics 4(1), 113–121 (Feb 2024), ISSN 2730-
5961, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00402-5
[92] Thomas, L.D.W., Autio, E.: Innovation Ecosystems (Oct 2019), U RL
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3476925
[93] Trezza, D.: To scrape or not to scrape, this is dilemma.
The post-API scenario and implications on digital research.
Frontiers in Sociology 8 (2023), ISSN 2297-7775, URL
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsoc.2023.1145038
[94] Vakkuri, V., Kemell, K.K., Jantunen, M., Abrahamsson, P.: “This is J ust
a Prototype”: How Ethics Are Ignored in Software Startup-Like E nviron-

40 D. Hartmann et al.
ments. In: Stray, V., Hoda, R., Paasivaara, M., Kruchten, P. (eds .) Agile
Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming, pp. 195–
210, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, Cham (2020), ISBN 978-3-030-49392-9
[95] Vakkuri, V., Kemell, K.K., Kultanen, J., Siponen, M., Abrahamsson, P.:
Ethically Aligned Design of Autonomous Systems: Industry Viewpoint and
an Empirical Study. EJBO Electronic Journal of Business Ethics and Or-
ganization Studies 27(1) (2022)
[96] van de Waerdt, P.J.: Information asymmetries: recognizing the
limits of the gdpr on the data-driven market. Computer Law
& Security Review 38, 105436 (2020), ISSN 0267-3649, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0267364920300418
[97] Veale, M.: Governing Machine Learning that Matters. Ph.D. thes is, Uni-
versity College London (UCL) (Aug 2019)
[98] Wehde: Datenzugang ¨ uber art. 31 abs. 2 dsa-e. MMR pp. 827 –830 (2022)
[99] Wieringa, M.: What to account for when accounting for algorithm s: a
systematic literature review on algorithmic accountability. In: Proc eed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Tran s-
parency, pp. 1–18, F AT* ’20, Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA (Jan 2020), ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7, U RL
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3351095.3372833
[100] Wilson, C., Ghosh, A., Jiang, S., Mislove, A., Baker, L., Szary, J., T rindel,
K., Polli, F.: Building and auditing fair algorithms: A case study in candi-
date screening. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on F airness,
Accountability, and Transparency, p. 666–677, F AccT ’21, Assoc iation for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2021), ISBN 978145038 3097,
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445928
[101] Wilson, C., Ghosh, A., Jiang, S., Mislove, A., Baker, L., Szary, J.,
Trindel, K., Polli, F.: Building and Auditing Fair Algorithms: A Case
Study in Candidate Screening. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Con -
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 666 –677,
ACM, Virtual Event Canada (Mar 2021), ISBN 978-1-4503-8309- 7, URL
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3442188.3445928
[102] W¨ orsd¨ orfer, M.: The e.u.’s artiﬁcial intelligence act: An ordoliberal assess-
ment. AI Ethics (2023)
[103] Young, M., Katell, M., Kraﬀt, P.: Confronting power and corpor ate cap-
ture at the facct conference. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM C onference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, p. 1375–1386, F AccT ’22,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2022), I SBN
9781450393522, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533194

Ϭ
ϱ
ϭϬ 
ϭϱ 
ϮϬ 
Ϯϱ 
ϯϬ 
ϯϱ 
ϰϬ 
ϰϱ 
ϱϬ 
Ϭ ϱ ϭϬ ϭϱ ϮϬ Ϯϱ ϯϬ 
ĂƚĂ 
ĂƚĂ